J. B. PRIESTLEY 

ANGEL PAVEMENT 



LONDON J. M. DENT & SONS LTD 
NEW YORK E. P. DUTTON & CO INC 



J. M. DENT 8c SONS LTD 
Aldine House - Bedford Street • London 
Made in Great Britain 
at 

The Aldine Press * Letchworth * Herts 
First published 1920 
First published in this edition 1937 
Last reprinted 1953 



CONTENTS 


CHAP. PAGE 

INTRODUCTION ix 

PROLOGUE I 

I. THEY ARRIVE II 

II. MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED .... 47 

III. THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 80 

IV. TURGIS SEES HER i . Il8 

V. MISS MATFIELD WONDERS . . * . 156 

( 

VI. MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE .... 203 

VII. ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS . . 245 

VIII. MISS MATFIELD’S NEW YEAR .... 290 

IX. MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED . . . -331 

X. THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT .... 374 

XI. THEY GO HOME 413 

EPILOGUE 455 


vfi 




INTRODUCTION 

It was when I was in my middle teens that I began buy- 
ing books. At that time I was trying, in a rather dreamy 
fashion, to learn how to export wool, tops, and noils from 
Bradford, my native city, to the Continent. Looking back 
at myself in that office, which hummed with the reek of 
our East Indian wool samples, I can see now that I cannot 
have been worth very much, but I can hardly, believe that 
I was worth even less than I received. I had very little 
money indeed, and the problem was, how to buy books out 
of it? I managed this chiefly by economising on my 
lunches. In a shop in the covered market you could buy 
a bag of stale buns for tuppence. That waft one way of 
doing it. Another was to buy from a Health Food shop 
a heavy slab of some mysterious nut sandwich for about 
threepence, arid wash it down with plenty of water. This 
nut stuff neither tickled nor satisfied the appetite, it merely 
destroyed the appetite, murdered it with a blunt instru- 
ment. Out of what I saved, I bought books, and most of 
these books belonged to the old shilling Everyman series. 
I have some of them, chiefly the green volumes of the 
poets, to this day. No bits of silver ever bought more 
enduring enchantment. 

I wish it were possible to go back to that youth from the 
office, as he stands looking at the Everyman volumes in 
Mr. Power's bookstall in the Bradford market, to whisper 
to him that the day will come when he will write a novel 
that will find its way into Everyman’s Library, and that 
this novel will be about an office. I think I had that lad 
in mind when I proudly and gladly agreed to the inclusion 
of Angel Pavement in this famous series. I cannot say that 
it is my own favourite among the books I have written, 
for I have no favourite. But most people whose opinion 
I respect seem to agree that it is the best of my novels. 
I began it just after I had finished The Good Companions, 
and just as I wrote that long fairy-tale of cheerful escape 
to please myself in the first place, so too I sat down to show 

ix 



X 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


the other side of the tapestry, the people for whom escape 
is impossible, first in order to satisfy some need of my own. 
The opening chapters of the novel were written rather 
slowly in London, and then I wrote the rest, at a tremen- 
dous pace, in a room that looked out on to the estuary of 
the Dart in South Devon. Fortunately, the astonishing 
popularity of The Good Companions gave Angel Pavement 
a flying start, and it did well for itself both in England and 
America, and had some success in translation in various 
other countries, notably in pre-Nazi Germany. Even if 
I had the impudence to try, I could not assess the quality 
of the imagination and writing in this novel, but I take 
leave to mention that, unlike a great many contemporary 
novels, it is at least carefully and, I think, soundly con- 
structed, with some ingenuity in the elaborate dovetailing 
of the sections belonging to the half-dozen chief characters. 
This partly explains why it has not yet been made into a 
film, for time after time experienced scenario writers, given 
the task of reducing it to a tidy film script, have worried 
away at it and then left it in despair. 

Though I was once in an office myself for a time, there 
is no autobiographical element in Angel Pavement . I have 
never lived or worked in the City of London, and actually 
know very little about it. I have never spent even a morn- 
ing in any street remotely resembling Angel Pavement. 
(It is no use looking for it, by the way. It nearly achieves 
an exact topographical position, as some well-informed 
readers have noticed, but nevertheless it does not exist.) 
I did not borrow a single figure from my memory of the 
office I once worked in. And I have it on the exasperated 
authority of a reader who is himself in the veneer business 
that my account of that business will not bear the slightest 
scrutiny: it is just * bosh/ I wish I knew more about busi- 
ness life because I should certainly write more about it. 
(This novel and one play, Cornelius , are the modest limit 
of my audacity.) On the other hand, ignorance and in- 
vention cannot explain this novel between them. When 
I wrote it, I had lived in London for some years, and I 
had come into contact with some of the modes of life I 
attempted to present in these pages. The life is one you 
coaid not very well avoid observing as you move about 
London, and I think the sheer pressure of it upon me com- 



INTRODUCTION xi 

pelled me, almost out of self-defence, to try and put it all 
into a novel. 

Up to the moment I had finished this book, the world 
of City offices, crowded buses, tubes, cheap tea-shops, little 
pubs in decaying old City streets, with the docks and the 
seven seas just round the comer, had haunted me for years, 
pestering me to write about it, and it was not until I had 
done my best to recreate it in this piece of fiction that I 
was free of it, relieved from the pressure of its weight of 
life. (Any fellow writer will know at once what I mean. 
I' only hope that I do not appear to the non-literary reader 
to be writing nonsense.) I wanted to deal with charac- 
ters who could not have found their way into the cheerful 
picaresque adventures of The Good Companions. As I have 
pointed out already, for these people of Angel Pavement 
there is no easy fairy-tale escape. They are me victims of 
circumstance — and the cruel financial chaos Of our time is 
part of that circumstance — and they have little to enjoy 
but the bitter though not unrefreshing brew; that a sense 
of irony can offer. (This is what Mr. Smooth definitely 
discovered, as I trust I have made clear.) ; Although I 
kept up a sort of lively bustle throughout the novel, and 
did not hesitate to introduce deliberately comic figures — 
for such figures have a habit of popping up in life and I 
see no reason why they should be exiled from literature 
just because the times are out of joint — any reader who 
fails to see that this is a novel belonging to the more tragic 
side of fiction has missed its intention. 

If I wrote this novel now, I doubt if I could preserve 
what seems to me a certain air of detachment, not perhaps 
in the eager bustling narrator, who is probably too anxious 
to make all his little points, but in the creator of the general 
scene. I should tend now to stress the heart-breaking de- 
pendence of these decent people on a rotten system. 1 
could not help doing this, because I find now even an ap- 
parent air of detachment almost impossible to attain. The 
reason is of course that our contempory world problems 
have such a terrible urgency, and it is my experience that 
no writer with a considerable public is allowed to forget 
the existence of such problems for a single morning, even 
if he could forget them when left to himself. But he is 
not left to himself, the telephone and the postman see to 
**8 



xii ANGEL PAVEMENT 

that; every morning he is reminded that meetings are being 
held, appeals and protests must be signed, funds must be 
contributed to. If he were a newspaper editor, he could 
hardly be reminded more often and more forcibly of what 
is happening in the world. He would have to make him- 
self blankly insensitive to the fate of his fellow-creatures 
if he wanted to preserve the detachment and peace of mind 
probably necessary for a creative work of art on any con- 
siderable scale. And if he made himself blankly insensi- 
tive, his creation would not be worth much. Moreover, 
a man has only a certain amount of mental or nervous 
energy, and if he is using so much of it worrying about this 
and that and the other disastrous piece of news, then he 
is not left with sufficient energy to sustain the incessant 
labour of creation. On the other hand, if he refuses his 
interest and attention for these matters outside his work, 
insists upon hoarding his nervous energy for the master- 
piece on which he is engaged, somehow that selfish refusal 
will leave its mark on his work. This I take to be the 
grand dilemma of the contemporary writer. It explains 
why there is so little fine creative writing in the old big 
manner, why so many good writers seem to produce things 
that have a hasty journalistic flavour, books of the season 
that will not outlive it. 

I am not sorry, however, that I wrote this novel with- 
out exhibiting myself in it as a social critic with a definite 
political bias. Whatever faults it may have, the story is 
better as it is. Since it first appeared, many of the livelier 
young novelists, both in England and America (and.I think 
there are more of them in America), have decided to give 
us Marxist fiction. And let us admit that for them the 
dilemma mentioned above hardly exists, for they do not 
want detachment of any kind, not even (if what they say 
in praise of Russia is true) the physical detachment 
demanded by most writers during working hours. They 
ought to be doing some grand work, but so far they have 
not been very fortunate either as contributors to litera- 
ture or as propagandists. Perhaps their obvious over- 
simplifications and their awful air of self-righteousness, 
though pleasing to their fellow-believers, tend to irritate 
the ordinary reader, who, by the way, may have been 
neither bought nor duped by the capitalists. Indeed, I 



INTRODUCTION 


xiii 

have a suspicion — and no mock modesty will persuade me 
to conceal it — that Angel Pavement may possibly have set 
more readers challenging the present system, if such a 
nasty muddle can be called a system, than any half-dozen 
of these fiery class-conscious theses in fiction. Yet the 
original impulse behind its writing was a literary one, the 
desire to explore and present a certain kind of life* a little 
world. Its social criticism — and it throws up a good deal 
— was really a by-product of this original literary process. 
And though I may have been guided at the time by an 
instinct to entertain, I am not sorry now that I showed my 
people still having some fun of their own even in the middle 
of the mess. If you do this you are liable to be condemned 
both by the middle-aged intellectuals and the earnest young 
revolutionaries. You are dismissed as being 'Dickensian/ 
because apparently you never really see comi^ people and 
droll episodes in actual life but only in the novels of Dick- 
ens. Thus, according to this fantastic kind lof criticism, 
the episode of the Dersingham dinner party In this novel 
has not behind it any comic observation of London life in 
the Nineteen-Twenties, but has in some mysterious fashion 
merely been filched from Dickens; and whereas I imagine 
that I spent some years going about and keeping my eyes 
and ears open, this is an illusion of mine, because all the 
time I was really sitting at home, grimly reading Dickens. 
All this is very strange. 

But I would rather think about that boy in Bradford, 
who is so proudly acquiring his shilling Everyman poets, 
is beginning to write verse himself (and perhaps the short- 
est way of describing that verse is to say that it added a 
great deal of water to Yeats's Wind Among the Reeds), and 
does not know that very soon a whole world will crack 
and collapse, that he will go marching off as a soldier (the 
last thing he would think of) and remain one for over four 
and a half years, and finally creep out of the ruins to turn 
himself at last into an essayist and novelist, and be lucky 
enough before he has done to have a long piece of his own 
as a hook in Everyman's Library . Why can't I slip back 
along the track of time with this wonderful bit of news, 
just to see his incredulous grin and the light of a wild daft 
hope in his eyes? 


J. B. PRIESTLEY 




TO 


C. S. EVANS 

because he is not only a good 
friend and a fine publisher, but 
also because he is a London man 
and will know what I am getting 
at in this London novel. 




PROLOGUE 


She came gliding along London's broadest street, and then 
halted, swaying gently. She was a steamship of some 
3,500 tons, flying the flag of one of the new Baltic states. 
The Tower Bridge cleared itself of midgets and toy vehicles 
and raised its two arms, and then she passed underneath, 
accompanied by cheerfully impudent tugs, and after some 
manoeuvring and hooting and shouting, finally came to 
rest alongside Hay's Wharf. The fine autumn afternoon 
was losing its bright gold and turning into smoke and 
distant fading flame, so that it seemed for a moment as if 
all London bridges were burning down. Then the flare of 
the day died out, leaving behind a quiet light, untroubled 
as yet by the dusk. On the wharf, men in caps lent a hand 
with ropes and a gangway, contrived to spit ironically, as if 
they knew what all this fuss was worth, and then retired to 
group themselves in the background, like a shabby and 
faintly derisive chorus; and men in bowler hats arrived 
from nowhere, carrying dispatch cases, note-books, bundles 
of papers, to exchange mysterious jokes with the ship's 
officers above; and two men in blue helmets, large and 
solid men, took their stand in the very middle of the scene 
and appeared to tell the ship, with a glance or two, that she 
could stay where she was for the time being because nothing 
against her was known so far to the police. The ship, for 
her part, began to think about discharging her mixed cargo. 

This cargo was so mixed that it included the man who 
now emerged from the saloon, came yawning on to the 
deck, and looked down upon Hay's Wharf. This solitary 
passenger was a man of medium height but of a massive 
build, square and bulky about the shoulders, and thick- 
chested. He might have been forty-five; he might have 
been nearly fifty; it was difficult to tell his exact age. His 
face was somewhat unusual, if only because it began by 
being almost bald at the top, then threw out two very 
bushy eyebrows, and finally achieved a tremendous mou- 
stache, drooping a little by reason of its very length and 
thickness; a moustache in a thousand, with something 



4 ANG&L PAVEMENT 

'em. Backward countries we used to call 'em. Pass- 
ports! ' Here he laughed, then tapped the young man on 
the lapel of his blue serge coat. ‘Never kept a rogue out 
yet, never. Only wants a bit of cleverness. All they do 
is to make trouble for honest men — fellows like me, wanting 
to do a bit of good to trade. Isn't that right? You bet 
it is.' 

He then saw the customs officers, who dipped a hand 
here and there in his two steamer trunks and three battered 
suitcases. 

‘I expect you 'd like to get away,' said one of them, be- 
ginning to chalk up his approval of the luggage. 

Mr. Golspie watched him with idle benevolence, looking 
quite unlike a man who has two hundred and fifty cigars 
cunningly stowed away in a steamer trunk. 'Not this 
time. No hurry, for once. I 'm staying aboard to pick a 
bit of dinner with the skipper here.' He waved a hand, 
presumably to indicate the city that lay all round them. 
‘It can wait.' 

'What can? ' And the young man gave a final flourish 
of chalk. 

'London can,' replied Mr. Golspie. 'All of it.' 

The young man laughed, not because he thought this 
last remark very witty but because this passenger suddenly 
reminded him of a comedian he had once seen at the 
Finsbury Park Empire. 'Well, I dare say it can. It's 
been waiting a long time.' 

Left to himself, with his cigars all safe, Mr. Golspie 
ruminated for a minute or two, then climbed to the upper 
deck, perhaps to decide what it was that had been waiting 
so long. 

He found himself staring at the immense panorama of 
the Pool. Dusk was falling; the river rippled darkly; and 
the fleet of barges across the way was almost shapeless. 
There was, however, enough daylight lingering on the north 
bank, where the black piles and the whitewashed wharf 
edge above them still stood out sharply, to give shape and 
character to the water front. Over on the right, the grey 
stones of the Tower were faintly luminous, as if they had 
contrived to store away a little of their centuries of sunlight. 
The white pillars of the Custom House were as plain as 
peeled wands* Nearer still, two church spires thrust them* 



PROLOGUE 5 

selves above the blur of stone and smoke and vague flicker- 
ing lights : one was as blanched and graceful as if it had been 
made of twisted paper, a salute to Heaven from the City ; 
the other was abrupt and dark, a despairing appeal, the 
finger of a hand flung out to the sky. Mr. Golspie, after 
a brief glance, ignored the pair of them. They in their 
turn, however, were dominated by the severely rectangular 
building to the left, boldly fronting the river and looking 
over London Bridge with a hundred eyes, a grim Assyrian 
bulk of stone. It challenged Mr. Golspie's memory, so 
that he regarded it intently. It was there when he was 
last in London, but was new then. Adelaide House, that 
was it. But he still continued to look at it, and with 
respect, for the challenge remained, though not to the 
memory. Both the blind eyes and the lighted eyes of its 
innumerable windows seemed to answer his stare and to tell 
him that he did not amount to very much, hot here in 
London. Then his gaze swept over the bridge to what 
could be seen beyond. The Cold Storage place, and then, 
cavernous, immense, the great black arch of Cahnon Street 
Station, and high above, far beyond, not in the city but in 
the sky and still softly shining in the darkenihg air, a ball 
and a cross. It was the very top of St. Paul's, seen above 
the roof of Cannon Street Station. Mr. Golspie recognized 
it with pleasure, and even half sung, half hummed, the line 
of a song that came back to him, something about 'St. 
Paul's with its grand old dome.' Good luck to St. Paul's! 
It did not challenge him: it was simply there, keeping 
an eye on everything but interfering with nobody. And 
somehow this glimpse of St. Paul’s suddenly made him 
realize that this was the genuine old monster, London. He 
felt the whole mass of it, spouting and fuming and roaring 
away. He realized something else too, namely, the fact 
that he was still wearing his old brown slippers, the ones 
that Hortensia had given him. He had arrived, and crept 
right into the very heart of London, wearing his old brown 
slippers. He had slipped two hundred and fifty cigars past 
their noses and had not even changed into his shoes. James 
Golspie was surveying London in his slippers, and London 
was not knowing, not caring — just yet. These thoughts 
gave him enormous pleasure, bringing with them a fine 
feeling of cunning and strength: he could have shaken 



6 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

hands with himself; if there had been a mirror handy he 
would probably have exchanged a wink with his reflection. 

He walked round the deck. Lights were flickering on 
along the wharf, immediately giving the unlit entrances 
a sombre air of mystery. A few men down there were 
heaving and shouting, but there was little to see. Mr. 
Golspie continued his walk, then stopped to look across 
and over London Bridge at the near water front, the south 
bank. Such lighting as there was on this side was very 
gay. High up on the first building past the bridge, coloured 
lights revolved about an illuminated bottle, to the glory of 
Booth's Gin, and further along, a stabbing gleam of crimson 
finally spelt itself into San deman’s Port. Mr. Golspie re- 
garded both these writings on the wall with admiration and 
sympathy. The sight of London Bridge itself too pleased 
him now, for all the buses had turned on their lights and 
were streaming across like a flood of molten gold. They 
brought another stream of pleasant images into Mr. Gol- 
spie’s mind, a bright if broken pageant of convivial London : 
double whiskies in crimson-shaded bars; smoking hot steaks 
and chops and a white cloth on a little corner table; the 
glitter and velvet of the music halls; knowing gossip, the 
fine reek of Havanas, round a club fender and fat leather 
chairs; pretty girls, a bit stiff perhaps (though not as stiff 
as they used to be), but very pretty and not so deep as the 
foreign ones, coming out of shops and offices, with evenings 
to spend and not much else : he saw it all and he liked the 
look of it. There was a size, a richness, about London. 
You could find anything or anybody you wanted in it, and 
you could also hide in it. He had been a fool to stay away 
so long. But, anyhow, here he was. He took a long and 
wide and exultant look at the place. 

Dinner that night was very good indeed, the best the 
boat had given him. Mr. Golspie and the captain shared 
it with the chief engineer, who came beaming and shining 
from the depths, and the first mate, usually a very wooden 
fellow, for ever brooding over some mysterious domestic 
tragedy in Riga, but now for once gigantically social and 
cheerful. The steward, the one with the cropped head and 
gold tooth, lavished his all upon them. Bottles that had 
not been emptied before were emptied now, together with 
some that were produced for the first time. The talk, so 



PROLOGUE 


7 

far as Mr. Golspie had any part in it, was conducted in a 
fantastic mixture of English, German, and the ship's own 
Baltic language, a mixture it would be impossible to repro- 
duce here, but it went very well, smashing its way through 
the entanglements of irregular verbs and doubtful substan- 
tives, for nothing removes the curse of Babel like food, 
drink, and good-fellowship. All four grew expansive, 
bellowed confidences, roared through the fog of cigar 
smoke, threw back their heads to laugh, and were gods for 
an hour. 

'Very soon we shall meet again/ said the captain to Mr. 
Golspie, clinking glasses for the third time. ‘Is that not 
so, my friend ? ' 

‘Leave it to me, my boy/ replied Mr. Golspie, very 
flushed, with tiny beads of perspiration on that massive 
bald front of his. 

‘You come back when you have finished your business 
here in London? ' 

‘As to that, I can't say. If I can, I will/ 

‘That is good/ said the captain. Then he looked very 
deep, and put a finger as big as a pork sausage to his fore- 
head. ‘And now you will tell us what this business is, eh? 
In secret. We will not tell/ 

The chief engineer tugged at the ends of his moustache, 
which was nearly as large as Mr. Golspie's, and tried to look 
even deeper than the captain, like the repository of in- 
numerable commercial secrets. 

'I say this/ cried the huge first mate, who was in no 
condition now to wait until his opinion had been asked. 
' I say this. It is good business. It is for the good of our 
country. I drink to you/ he shouted, and promptly did 
so, with the result that he immediately remembered that 
disastrous affair at Riga, and sat silent, with the tears in 
his eyes, for the next twenty minutes. 

‘Well, I '11 tell you,' said Mr. Golspie, taking out his cigar 
and looking at it very knowingly, as if it was a fellow 
conspirator. ‘ There 's no need to make a mystery of it. 
D' you remember Mikorsky? Wait a minute. Not the 
little fellow with the office in Danzig, but the big fellow 
with the beard, in the timber trade. That 's the one. 
Remember him ? ' 

The captain did, and was evidently so pleased by this 



8 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

effort of memory that he appeared to conduct several bars 
of one of the stormier symphonies. The mate remembered, 
too, but only nodded, his tearful blue eyes being still fixed 
on that tragic interior in Riga. The chief engineer did not 
remember Mikorsky, and, in what seemed nothing less than 
mental anguish, repeated the name in twenty different 
tones, beginning very high and ending in a despairing bass. 

'I 've done one or two little jobs for him/ Mr. Golspie 
continued, 'during the time I had a bit of a pull. We 'd a 
night or two together, too. I met him one day, not a 
month ago, and he said he was just going down into the 
country, to see his cousin, and I ought to go with him. 
So I did. I 'd nothing better to do. Hot as hell it was 
down there, too, and I was bitten to death. This cousin 
of Mikorsky's was in the furniture end of the timber 
trade, and he 'd invented a new process, machine, treat- 
ment, everything, for turning out veneers and inlays. And 
labour costs next to nothing down there. I asked where 
all this stuff was going. Well, they 'd got orders from 
Germany and Czechoslovakia and Austria and a chance of 
something in Paris. “ What 's it going to cost in London? '' 
I said, showing 'em one of their lines, and they told me. 
It sounded all right to me, but I didn't say anything. Not 
then. I went away and made a few inquiries. I found 
out what they were pa}dng for this sort of stuff in Bethnal 
Green and Hoxton and those parts, in London, you know, 
where the furniture 's made * 

'Bednal Green, yes/ said the chief engineer proudly. 
‘My uncle Stefan was there, yes, old Stefan in Bednal Green. 
Socialist / he added, as a melancholy afterthought. 

‘He was, was he?' Mr. Golspie boomed, with a certain 
brutal heartiness characteristic of him. ‘Well, good luck 
to him! I 'll get on with the tale. They were paying half 
as much again for the same sort o' stuff, veneers and inlays, 
not a bit better, here in London. Couldn't get it where it 
was produced so cheap, y' see? Didn't look about 'em. 
They 're getting slow here. There 's something in this for 
me, I said to myself, and off I went down there again, to 
see this other Mikorsky, the cousin. I wanted to know how 
much of this stuff I could have every month, various lines, 
and the prices. They told* me, and guaranteed it. We 
had a few drinks on it, and I walk out, with a contract in 



PROLOGUE 9 

my pocket, so much of this, that, and the other, at so much, 
whenever I liked to take it up, and me the sole agent for 
Great Britain/ 

‘Very good business/ said the captain, with a grave 
judicial air, in spite of his rather goggly eyes. * And now, 
you sell it all, eh? You make big profit ? 1 

* What I do is to find somebody who 's in the way of 
selling it, somebody who's in this line o' business, and then 
go in with 'em/ Mr. Golspie refreshed himself noisily, 

‘ And if I haven't laid my hand on somebody by this time 
the day after to-morrow, my name's not Jimmy Golspie/ 

‘Make plenty of money, be rich, eh? ' 

'No, it 's too honest. But I '11 pick a bit up, to be going 
on with.' 

'Ah, no, no,' cried the captain, reaching over and patting 
Mr. Golspie on the shoulder, ‘you make plenty, here in 
London. Ho-ho, yesl Plenty! Money here in London — 
oh — 1' And he held out his hands as if he expected the 
Bank of England to be emptied into them. 

‘Not so much as you think/ said Mr. Golspie, shaking 
his head very slowly. ‘ Oh, no, not at all. They may have 
\t, but it 's all tied up. It 's not — er — shir-circulating . 
[ tell you, they 're slow here, they 're slow/ 

'You think they sleep? ' 

'That 's right. Half asleep, most of 'em/ 

'Ho-ho,' roared the captain. ‘And you will put them 
awake?’ 

' One or two, p'raps, I might be able to shake up a bit. 
If not, I 'm on the move again. And I '11 have to be on 
the move now, boys. I told that steward's mate — the 
fellow that plays the concertina — to go and get me a taxi 
and take my traps ashore. It ought to be there, at the 
comer, any minute now. All right then. Just a last one 
for luck.' 

They were having this last one, with some formality, 
when the man returned to say that the taxi was waiting. 
Mr. Golspie led the way to the deck, and then stopped near 
the gangway to say good-bye. 

‘Now for it,' he cried, more for his own benefit than for 
his listeners/ 'Straight back into the old rabbit warren. 
God, what a place 1 Millions and millions, and most of 'em 
don't know they Ye bora yet l Eyes and tails , that 's all 



10 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

they are, diving in and out of their little holes. The good 
old rabbit warren. Look at it ! Ah, well, it 's no good 
looking at it here because you can't see it. But I've 
been looking at it. What a place! Well, chief — well, 
captain — this is where I go.' 

'And the beautiful daughter, the little Lena?' the cap- 
tain inquired. * Is she here, waiting for you ? * 

'Not yet. She 's still in Paris, with her aunt, but she *11 
be coming over as soon as I 've settled down. Golspie and 
Daughter, that 'll be the style of the firm then, and we '11 
see what London makes of it. And — my God — if I don't 
waken some of 'em up, she will, ihe artful little devil. But 
she 'll have to behave here. Yes, she '11 have to behave. 
Well, captain, keep her afloat, and remember me to all the 
girls and boys at the other end, and let 's meet again next 
time you 're over. Drop me a line to the office here. I 'll 
tell 'em where to find me. Where the devil 's the lad ? Oh, 
he 's there, is he ? Has he taken everything ashore ? Right 
you are! So long!' 

After a final wave of the hand, Mr. Golspie, a very mas- 
sive figure now in his huge ulster, made a slow, steady, 
and very dignified progress down the gangway. When he 
found himself treading at last the stones of London, he 
turned his head and nodded, then strode off more briskly to 
the comer of Battle Bridge Lane, where the taxi was wait- 
ing. Two minutes later, he had gone hooting into the 
lights and shadows of the city, which sent whirling past the 
windows a crazy frieze, glimmering, glittering, darkening, 
of shops, taverns, theatre doors, hoardings, church porches, 
crimson and gold segments of buses, little lighted interiors 
of saloon cars, railings and doorsteps and lace curtains, 
mounds of chocolate, thousands of cigarette packets, beer 
and buns and aspirin and wreaths and coffins, and faces, 
faces, more and more faces, strange, meaningless, and with- 
out end. But the lights that came flashing in found a tiny 
answering gleam in Mr. Golspie's eyes; and when they had 
gone, in the double darkness of the cab and the shadow of 
that great moustache, he grinned. London neither knew 
nor cared; nevertheless, there it was: Mr. James Golspie 
had arrived. 



CHAPTER I 


THEY ARRIVE 
I 

Many people who think they know the City well have been 
compelled to admit that they do not know Angel Pavement. 
You could go wandering half a dozen times between Bunhill 
Fields and London Wall, or across from Barbican to Broad 
Street Station, and yet miss Angel Pavement. Some of the 
street maps of the district omit it altogether; taxi-drivers 
often do not even pretend to know it; policemen are fre- 
quently not sure; and only the postmen who are caught 
within half a dozen streets of it are triumphantly positive. 
This all suggests that Angel Pavement is of no great im- 
portance. Everybody knows Finsbury Pavement, which 
is not very far away, because Finsbury Pavement is a street 
of considerable length and breadth, full of shops, warehouses, 
and offices, to say nothing of buses and trams, for it is a 
real thoroughfare. Angel Pavement is not a real thorough- 
fare, and its length and breadth are inconsiderable. You 
might bombard the postal districts of E.C.i and E.C.2 with 
letters for years, and yet never have to address anything to 
Angel Pavement. The little street is old, and has its fair 
share of sooty stone and greasy walls, crumbling brick and 
rotting woodwork, but somehow it has never found itself 
on the stage of history. Kings, princes, great bishops, have 
never troubled it; murders it may have seen, but they have 
all belonged, to private life; and no literary masterpiece has 
ever been written under one of its roofs. The guide-books, 
the volumes on London’s byways, have not a word to say 
about it, and those motor coaches, complete with guide, 
that roam about the city in the early evening never go near 
it. The guide himself, who knows all about Henry the 
Eighth and Wren and Dickens and is so highly educated 
that he can still talk with an Oxford accent and at the very 
top of his voice, could probably tell you nothing about 
Angel Pavement. 


ii 



12 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

It is a typical City side-street, except that it is shorter, 
narrower, and dingier than most. At one time it was 
probably a real thoroughfare, but now only pedestrians can 
escape at the western end, and they do this by descending 
the six steps at the comer. For anything larger and less 
nimble than a pedestrian, Angel Pavement is a cul-de-sac, 
for all that end, apart from the steps, is blocked up by Chase 
& Cohen: Carnival Novelties , and not even by the front 
of Chase & Cohen but by their sooty, mouldering, dusty- 
windowed back. Chase & Cohen do not believe it is worth 
while offering Angel Pavement any of their carnival novel- 
ties — many of which are given away, with a thirty-shilling 
dinner and dance, in the West End every gala night — and 
so they turn the other way, not letting Angel Pavement 
have so much as a glimpse of a pierrot hat or a false nose. 
Perhaps this is as well, for if the pavementeers could see 
pierrot hats and false noses every day, there is no telling 
what might happen. 

What you do see there, however, is something quite 
different. Turning into Angel Pavement from that crazy 
jumble and jangle of buses, lorries, drays, private cars, and 
desperate bicycles, the main road, you see on the right, first 
a nondescript blackened building that is really the side of a 
shop and a number of offices; then The Pavement Dining 
Rooms: R. Ditton, Propr ., with R. Ditton's usual window 
display of three coco-nut buns, two oranges, four bottles 
of cherry cider picturesquely grouped, and if not the boiled 
ham the meat and potato pie ; then a squashed little house 
or bundle of single offices that is hopelessly to let; and then 
the bar of the White Horse , where you have the choice of any 
number of mellowed whiskies or fine sparkling ales, to be 
consumed on or off the premises, and if on, then either pub- 
licly or privately. You are now half way down the street, 
and could easily throw a stone through one of Chase & 
Cohen's windows, which is precisely what somebody, mad- 
dened perhaps by the thought of the Carnival Novelties, 
has already done. On the other side, the southern side, 
the left-hand side when you turn in from the outer world, 
you begin, rather splendidly, with Dunbury <£ Co.: In- 
candescent Gas Fittings , and two windows almost bright 
with sample fittings. Then you arrive at T. Benenden : 
Tobacconist , whose window is filled with dummy packets of 



THEY ARRIVE 13 

cigarettes and tobacco that have long ceased even to pre- 
tend they have anything better than air in them; though 
there are also, as witnesses to T. Benenden's enterprise, one 
or two little bowls of dry and dusty stuff that mutter, in 
faded letters, 4 Our Own Mixture, Cool Sweet Smoking, 
Why not try it?’ To reach T. Benenden's little counter, 
you go through the street doorway and then turn through 
another door on the left. The stairs in front of you — 
and very dark and dirty they are, too — belong to C. 
War stein: Tailors * Trimmings . Next to T. Benenden and 
C. Warstein is a door, a large, stout, old door from which 
most of the paint has flaked and shredded away. This door 
has no name on it, and nobody, not even T. Benenden, has 
seen it open or knows what there is behind it. There it is, 
a door, and it does nothing but gather dust and cobwebs 
and occasionally drop another flake of dried patint on the 
worn step below. Perhaps it leads into another world. 
Perhaps it will open, one morning, to admit an angel, who, 
after looking up and down the little street for k moment, 
will suddenly blow the last trumpet. Perhaps that is the 
real reason why the street is called Angel Pavement. What 
is certain, however, is that this door has no concern with the 
building next to it and above it, the real neighbour of T. 
Benenden and C. Warstein and known to the postal autho- 
rities as No. 8, Angel Pavement. 

No. 8, once a four-story dwelling-house where some 
merchant-alderman lived snugly on his East India divi- 
dends, is now a little hive of commerce. For the last few 
years, it has contrived to keep an old lady and a compan- 
ion (unpaid) in reasonable comfort at The Palms Private 
Hotel, Torquay, and, in addition, to furnish the old lady's 
youngest niece with an allowance of two pounds a week in 
order that she might continue to share a studio just off the 
Fulham Road and attempt to design scenery for plays that 
are always about to be produced at the Everyman Theatre, 
Hampstead. It has also indirectly paid the golf club sub- 
scriptions and caddie fees of the junior partner of Fulton, 
Gregg, and Fulton, the solicitors, who are responsible for 
the letting and the rents. As for the tenants themselves, 
their names may be found on each side of a squat door- 
way. The ground floor is occupied by the Kwik-Work 
Razor Blade Co., Ltd., the first floor by Twigg & Dersingham , 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


14 

and the upper floors by the Universal Hosiery Co., the 
London and Counties Supply Stores , and, at the very top, 
keeping its eye on everybody, the National Mercantile 
Enquiry Agency, which seems to be content with the pos- 
session of a front attic. 

This does not mean that we have now finished with No. 
8, Angel Pavement. It is for the sake of No. 8 that we 
have come to Angel Pavement at all, but not for the whole 
of No. 8, but only for the first floor. No doubt a number of 
tales, perhaps huge violent epics, could be started, jumped 
into life, merely by opening the door of the Kwik-Work 
Razor Blade Co., Ltd., or by trudging up the stairs to the 
Universal Hosiery Co. and the London and Counties Supply 
Stores, or by looking at the grimy skylight and giving a 
shout to the National Mercantile Enquiry Agency ; but we 
must keep to the less mysterious but more respectable first 
floor — and Twigg & Dersingham. 

II 

On this particular morning in autumn, Mrs. Cross was 
rather later than usual. That did not matter very much 
because it was not one of the floor-washing mornings but 
just one of the ordinary dust-round-and-sweep-up-a-bit 
mornings. But somebody, one of the interfering sort, had 
left a note for her in the general office, that is, the room 
just behind the frosted glass partitions and the sort of 
ticket office window with Enquiries on it, and this note 
said: Mrs. Cross . What about turning this room out for a 
change? Thank you ! ! 

'An ' thank youV said Mrs. Cross, quite aloud and with 
grim irony, as she tore up this note and popped it in the 
top of the stove. To show that she was not the kind of 
woman to be dictated to in this fashion, she immediately 
went and gave the other room, Mr. Dersingham’s private 
office, a thoroughly good sweeping and dusting. Having 
done that, she waddled straight across the general office 
to the other room, which, with its long counter and cup- 
boards and drawers and samples of wood and litter, was 
the one she liked least, being always in a terrible mess. On 
her way, she completely ignored the general office, did not 
even give it a look, just as if it were full of people in the 



THEY ARRIVE 15 

habit of leaving notes. Her back told it very plainly that 
she would clean up the office in her own way. Once in the 
other room, the nasty one, she felt so pleased about this 
rebuff that she set to work with a will, and for the next ten 
minutes was enveloped in a cloud of dust. By the time 
she had finished, there may have been very few articles in 
the room that were free from dust, but nearly all of them 
had at least exchanged their old dust for another variety 
that came perhaps from quite a distant comer. Then she 
thrust back a wisp of grey hair from her swollen face, on 
which time and trouble had first sketched a few lines and 
then deepened them by puffing out the surrounding flesh ; 
she dragged her swollen feet across to the discarded leather 
office chair in the corner; she flopped into the chair and put 
her swollen hands — for though she said with some truth 
that she worked her fingers to the bone, hot water and soap 
and wet scrubbing brushes had piled sodden, nerveless flesh 
on those bones — in her lap, and rested. Immediately she 
plunged into a fierce reverie, in which the figure of Mr. 
Cross, who suffered from rheumatoid arthritis, the two 
rooms between the City Road and the black Regent's 
Canal that were her home, Mrs. Tomlinson, the woman 
she was going to clean for later in the morning, and the 
image of a pound of stewing steak, all played their parts. 
Then she returned to the general office. 

This time, she noticed its existence, and what she saw 
suddenly gave her a little fright. She had been a bit too 
hasty (her old fault) about that note. It really did want a 
good tidying. She had neglected it a bit lately, because 
for the last three mornings she had been late, all because 
she was not getting her proper sleep, and all because Mrs. 
Williams and her husband on the next floor had got a loud 
speaker, one of them little horns, and it was not only a loud 
speaker but also a late speaker, and in fact would speak 
your head off. And if she didn't get on with this office a 
bit, the one that left that note would be complaining to 
Mr. Dcrsingham, and then that might mean another job 
gone, all due to hastiness. She had better be putting hei 
hastiness behind a brush and duster. And, as if to give her 
a final push, a clock somewhere outside sounded the half 
hour. Half-past eight! — well, now she would have to 
bustle round. 



16 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

She was still bustling round — though, to be accurate, she 
was only engaged in passing a languid, duster-holding hand 
over the tin cover of the typewriter — when Messrs. Twigg 
and Dersingham's next employee arrived, and their day 
really began. The frosted glass door that opened from the 
little space in which inquirers were kept waiting for a few 
minutes, now swung back to admit into the General Office 
the body of a boy about fifteen, whose eyes were focused 
upon a paper, folded into a very small compass, that he 
held about four inches away from them. This was the 
office boy or very junior clerk, Stanley Poole, who had 
just come all the way from Hackney, which remained with 
him as a combined flavour of cocoa and bread dipped in 
bacon fat that still haunted his palate. His body, which 
was small and thin but sufficiently tough, and was crowned 
by a snub nose, some freckles, greyish-greenish eyes, and 
some unbrushed sandy hair, had been in the service of 
Twigg and Dersingham for the last twenty minutes, when 
it had boarded a tram and a bus and had walked down 
several streets. Now it had arrived in the office. But his 
mind had not yet begun the day's work. Even now, when 
the very threshold had been passed, it was still in the wilds 
of Mexico, enjoying the heroic and exhilarating companion- 
ship of Jack Dash wood and Dick Robinson, the Boy 
Aviators, the terror of all Mexican bandits. 

‘So you've come,' said Mrs. Cross, putting back that 
wisp of hair again. ‘ It 's about time I was 'opping it if 
you 've come/ 

Stanley looked up and nodded. With a sigh, he with- 
drew from the world of the Boy Aviators and the Mexican 
bandits. He tried to fold his paper into a still smaller 
compass, before cramming it into his pocket. 

‘Read, read, read!' cried Mrs. Cross derisively. ‘Some 
of yer 's always at it. What they find to put in all the time 
beats me. What 's that yer reading now ? Murders, I '11 bet.' 

‘Tisn’t/ replied Stanley,, balancing himself on one leg 
for no particular reason that we can discover. ‘ It 's a boys' 
paper.' He made this announcement with a kind of sullen 
reluctance, not because he was really a sullen lad, but 
simply because he had discovered that when his elders 
asked these questions, they were usually not in search of 
information, but were trying to get at him. 



THEY ARRIVE 17 

'Penny bloods, them things is/ 

"Tisn't,' said Stanley, balancing himself on the other leg 
now. 'This is tuppence. I buy it ev'ry week, have done 
ever since it come out. Boy’s Companion , it 's called. It 's 
got the best tales in/ he added, in a sudden burst of confi- 
dence. 'All about boys who fly in airplanes an* go to 
Mexico an* Russia an* all over an' have advenshers! ' 

'Advenshers! They 'd be better off at 'ome — with their 
advenshers! You *11 be wantin' to go an' 'ave advenshers 
yerself next — and then what will yer poor mother say? ' 

But this only goaded Stanley into making new and even 
more dangerous admissions. ' I 'm going to try and be a 
detective,' he mumbled. 

'Well now, did y' ever! ' cried Mrs. Cross, at once shocked 
and delighted. 'A detective! I never 'eard of such a 
thing! What d' yer come 'ere for if yer want to be a 
detective? There's no detectin' 'ere. Go on with yer! 
'Ere, yer not big enough, and yer never will be either 'cos 
yer 'd 'ave to be a pleeceman first before they 'diet yer be 
a detective, and they 'd never 'ave yer as a pleeceman.' 

‘You can be a detective without being a bobby first,' 
replied Stanley, scornfully. He had gone into this ques- 
tion, and was not to be put off by a mere outsider like Mrs. 
Cross. "Sides, you can be a private detective an' find 
jewels an' shadder people. That 's what I 'd like to do — 
shadder people.’ 

'What's that? Follerin' 'em about, is it? Oh, that's 
nasty work, that is. Shadderin' ! I 'd shadder yer if I 
caught yer at it, my words I would.' And Mrs. Cross 
took up her brush and dust-pan and gave them a fierce 
little shake, almost as if she had just caught them at it. 
'Now you just get on with yer work like a good boy, and 
don't you go tellin' anybody else yer want to be shadderin' 
else yer 'll be getting yerself into trouble. Yer can't 
expect people to 'ave any patience with shadderers. If 
Mr. Dersingham knew what was goin' on in that 'ead of 
yours, 'e 'd tell yer to go straight 'ome and 'ave nothing 
more to do with yer, and yer 'd find yerself shadderin' for 
another job, and that 's all the shadderin' you 'd get.' 

Stanley turned away, and then pulled a face, not so much 
at Mrs. Cross as at the whole narrow school of thought 
represented at this moment by Mrs. Cross. He went to 



18 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

the letter-box and brought back the morning's post, which 
he placed on the nearest high desk. There he remembered 
something, and looked with a grin at Mrs. Cross, who was 
now having a final bustle round. 

'Did you see that note left for you? ' he inquired. 

Mrs. Cross suspended operations at once. 'Yes, I did 
see it, and if yer want to know where it is, I can tell yer, 
'cos it 's in that stove.' She struck an attitude that sug- 
gested a counsel for the prosecution of the high-handed 
type. ‘And oo, might I ask, left that there note? Oo 
wrote it? Just you tell me that, that 's all! ' 

'Miss Matfield wrote it.' 

' An' I thought as much. Soon as I set eyes on it, I knew. 
Miss Matfield wrote it! Miss Matfield!' Her irony was 
now so terrible that she shook all over with it, and her head 
seemed in danger of falling off. ' And 'ow long, might I ask, 
'as Miss Matfield been in this office, doin' 'er typewriting? 
'Ow long? Two munce. All right — three munce. An' 
'ow long 'ave I been cleaning for Twiggs and Dersinghams, 
coming 'ere ev'ry morning, week in an' week out, to clean 
this office? Yer don't know. No, yer don't know, and 
yer Miss Matfield doesn't know. Well, I '11 tell yer. I 've 
been cleaning for Twiggs and Dersinghams for seven years, 
I 'ave. It wasn't this Mr. Dersingham, that started me, it 
was his uncle, old Mr. Dersingham, 'im oo 's dead now 
— an' a nice old gentleman 'e was too, nicer than this one 
an' a better 'ead on 'im to my way of thinking — and when 
this Mr. Dersingham took on, 'e sent for me and said, "You 
keep on cleaning, Mrs. Cross, and I '11 pay yer whatever my 
uncle did," that 's what 'e said to me in that very room there, 
and I said, "Much obliged, sir, and the very best attention 
as always," and 'e said, “ I 'm sure it will, Mrs. Cross." Type- 
writers! Coming and going so fast I can't be bothered 
learning their names. If there's been one 'ere since I started, 
there 's been eight or ten or a dozen. Miss Matfield! Now 
when she comes in, just give 'er a message from me,' she 
cried, thoroughly reckless by this time. 'Just say to 'er: 
"Mrs. Cross 'as seen the note left and only asks oo is clean- 
ing this office, Miss Matfield or 'er, and if 'er, then them oo 's 
been doing it for seven years, week in and week out, knows 
their own business better than them oo 's only been type- 
writing 'ere for three munce, and so Mrs. Cross '11 thank her 



THEY ARRIVE 


19 

to keep 'er notes to /erself in future till they 're asked for. 
Just you tell 'er that, boy. And I 'll say good-morning/ 

With that, Mrs. Cross unfastened her apron and gathered 
up her things with great dignity, gave Stanley a final shake 
of the head, and waddled out, closing the outer door behind 
her, a moment later, with a decisive bang. 

Left to himself, Stanley, with the contemptuous air of a 
man who is meant for better things, began his morning’s 
work. After taking off the two typewriter covers, dump- 
ing a few books on the high desks, and filling up all the ink- 
pots and putting out clean sheets of blotting paper (which 
duty was a little fad of Mr. Smeeth's), he remembered that 
he was a creature with a soul. So, grasping a short round 
ruler in such a way that it remotely resembled a revolver, 
he crouched behind Mr. Smeeth's high stool for a few tense 
moments, then sprang out, pointing his gun at the place 
where the great criminal's bottom waistcoat button would 
have been, and said hoarsely: 'Put 'em up. Diamond Jack. 
No, you don't! Not a move! ' He gave a warning flour- 
ish of the gun, then said casually, over his shoulder, to one 
of his assistants or a few police sergeants or somebody like 
that, ' Take him away.' And that was the end of Diamond 
Jack, and yet another triumph for S. Poole, the young de- 
tective whose exploits were rivalling even those of the Boy 
Aviators. And having thus refreshed himself, Stanley re- 
placed the round ruler and condescended to perform one 
or two more of those monotonous and trifling actions that 
Messrs. Twigg and Dersingham demanded of him at this 
hour of the morning. These left him ample time for thought, 
and he began to wonder if he would be able to get out dur- 
ing the morning. Once outside the office — even though he 
was going to the post office or the railway goods department 
or some firm not four streets away — he could enjoy himself, 
for the affairs of Twigg and Dersingham faded to a grey 
thread of routine ; he plunged at once into the drama of Lon- 
don's underworld; and as he hopped and dodged about the 
crowded streets, like a sandy-haired sparrow, he was able 
to do some marvellous shadowing. There also loomed al- 
ready, early as it was, a problem that would become more 
and more disturbing as the long morning wore on and he 
became hungrier and hungrier. This was the problem of 
where to go and what to buy for lunch, for which his mother 

B93* 



20 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

allowed him a shilling every day. He always ate his break- 
fast so quickly that his stomach forgot about it almost at 
once and left him hollow inside by ten o'clock and abso- 
lutely aching by twelve. He often wondered what would 
happen to him if, instead of being the first to go to lunch, 
at half past twelve, he was the last, and had to wait until 
about half past one. There are innumerable ways of spend- 
ing a shilling on lunch, from the downright solid way of 
blowing the lot on sausage or fried liver and mashed pota- 
toes, say at the Pavement Dining Rooms , to the immediately 
delightful but rather unsatisfying method of spreading it 
out, buying a jam tart here, a banana there, and some milk 
chocolate somewhere else ; and Stanley knew them all. 

He was trifling with the thought of trying the nearest 
Lyons again, and was actually searching his memory to 
discover the exact price of a portion of Lancashire hotpot 
in that establishment, when he was interrupted by the ar- 
rival of a colleague. This was Turgis, the clerk, who might 
be described as Stanley's senior or Mr. Smeeth's junior. He 
was in his early twenties, a thinnish, awkward young man, 
with a rather long neck, poor shoulders, and large, clumsy 
hands and feet. You would not say he was ugly, but on 
the other hand you would probably admit, after reflection, 
that it would have been better for him if he had been 
actually uglier. As it was, he was just unprepossessing. 
You would not have noticed him in a crowd — and a great 
deal of his time was spent in a crowd — but if your attention 
had been called to him you would have given him one 
glance and then decided that that was enough. He was 
obviously neither sick nor starved, yet something about 
his appearance, a total lack of colour and bloom, a slight 
pastiness and spottiness, the faint grey film that seemed to 
cover and subdue him, suggested that all the food he ate 
was wrong, all the rooms he sat in, beds he slept in, and 
clothes he wore, were wrong, and that he lived in a world 
without sun and clean rain and wandering sweet air. His 
features were not good nor yet too bad. He had rather 
full brown eyes that might have been called pretty if 
they had been set in a girl’s face; a fairly large nose 
that should have been masterful but somehow was not; 
a small, still babyish mouth, usually open, and revealing 
several big and irregular teeth; and a drooping rather 



THEY ARRIVE 21 

than retreating chin. His blue serge suit bulged and 
bagged and sagged and shone, and had obviously done all 
these things five days after it had left the multiple cheap 
tailor's shop, in the window of which a companion suit, 
clothing the wax model of a light-weight champion, still 
maliciously challenged Turgis with its smooth surface and 
sharp creases every time he sneaked past it. His soft collar 
was crumpled, his tie a little frayed, and there was a pulpy 
look about his shoes. Any sensible woman could have 
compelled him to improve his appearance almost beyond 
recognition within a week, and it was quite clear that no 
sensible woman took any interest in him. 

"Morning, Stanley,' he said, not very cheerfully. 

"Hello/ said Stanley, in the toneless voice of one who 
expects nothing. 

Turgis went over to his own high desk, pulled a blotting 
pad out of the drawer, put a book or two on his desk, 
examined a note he had left on his pad, reminding him to 
"ling Whishaws first thing,’ and then spent a melancholy 
five minutes at the telephone. 

‘Will I have to call there this morning?’ Stanley 
asked hopefully, when Turgis had rung off. 

‘No, they're sending somebody. Good job, tool We 
don’t want you off half the morning. You ’ll stop in and 
do a bit of work, my son, for a change. Do you good.' 

‘ What work ? ’ demanded Stanley, with scorn. 

‘By jingo, I like that I ’ cried Turgis. " There 's plenty to 
do, if you '11 only look for it instead of dodging it. You 
ask Smcethy, he '11 find you some. Haven’t you got 
enough? You can do some of mine, if you like. I 've got 
more than I want.’ 

Stanley changed the subject. 1 1 say,’ he began, grinning, 

‘ you ought to have heard old Ma Cross on about that note. 
She let herself go all right, didn’t she just! Oo, you ought 
to have heard her.' 

1 What did she say ? ' Turgis inquired. But he did it very 
languidly, just to show that what amused small fry like 
Stanley might not amuse him. 

At that moment, however, they heard the outer door 
opening, and the next moment the cause of all the trouble. 
Miss Matfield herself, walked in. She flung down a library 
book, her large handbag, and a pair of gloves on her table, 



22 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

then marched over to her hook and removed her coat and 
hat, while the other two waited in silence. They were both 
rather frightened of Miss Matfield. Even Mr. Smeeth and 
Mr. Dersingham himself were rather frightened of Miss 
Matfield. 

* Good morning/ she cried, looking from one to the other 
of them, and, as usual, putting a disturbingly ironical 
inflection into her tones. 'Are we all very well this 
morning? Well, I 'm not/ and here, her voice changed. 
‘Oh, Lord, I thought I 'd never get here. That bus 
journey gets fouler every morning, slower and slower, and 
fouler and fouler/ She sat down opposite her machine, 
but took no notice of it. 

‘You ought to try the Tube/ Turgis suggested, not very 
boldly or hopefully. He had made this suggestion before. 
Everything had been said before, and they ail knew it. 

'Oh, I can't bear the Tube/ Once more she seemed to 
annihilate the whole vast organization. 

It was now Stanley's turn. ‘ Oo, I like it. I think it 's 
exciting. I wish they had 'em where we live.' 

Miss Matfield was now busy rummaging in her handbag, 
and all she said was ‘Curse! ' rather like a villain in an old- 
fashioned melodrama. It is only these strictly modem 
young ladies, who live their own life by pounding a type- 
writer all day and then retiring to tiny bed-sitting rooms in 
clubs, these beings who are supposed to be the inheritors 
of the earth, who can afford to talk like villains in old- 
fashioned melodramas. Miss Matfield, after a final and 
unsuccessful rummage, said ‘Curse! ' again, then closed the 
bag with a sharp snap, seized her gloves, and marched them 
over to her coat. The other two said nothing, but looked 
at her. What they saw was a girl of twenty-seven or 
twenty-eight, or even twenty-nine, with dark bobbed hair, 
decided eyebrows, a smouldering eye, a jutting nose, a 
mouth that was a discontented crimson curve, and a firm 
round chin that was ready to double itself at any moment. 
She was not pretty, but she might have been handsome if 
somebody had kept telling her she was pretty. She was a 
trifle taller and bigger-boned than the average girl of her 
class and type, with a good neck and good shoulders, but 
her figure as a whole — and it was plain to the view in her 
belted orange-coloured jumper, her short dark skirt, and 



THEY ARRIVE 


23 

artfully silky stockings — was perhaps too top-heavy, too 
masterful in the bust for the flattened calves below, to 
please everybody. (Including that distant and wistful 
connoisseur, Turgis, who by making an effort at times was 
able to see her as a female figure and not as a personality.) 
For the rest, her face, her voice, her manner, all pointed 
to the conclusion that Lilian Matfield nursed some huge, 
some overwhelming grievance against life, but though she 
gave tongue to a thousand little grievances every day, she 
never mentioned the monster. But there it was, raging 
away, when she was complaining or being bitter about 
everything; and there it was, raging away more furiously 
than ever, when she was being bright and jolly, which was 
not often, and hardly at all during business hours. 

'The char must have got my note/ she announced on 
her return to her table, 'but I must say she doesn't seem 
to have done much about it. Look at that. This is the 
foulest office I 've ever worked in. She never makes any 
attempt to clean it properly. All she 's done now is to 
walk round with a duster. And we 've got to spend all 
day in the beastly place, all filthy, just because she won't 
take the least trouble. Well, I 'm going to make a row 
about it/ 

'She got it all right,' cried Stanley, delighted to be im- 
portant and to make a little trouble for somebody. ‘You 
ought to have heard her. Didn't she go on I' And, in 
order to show exactly how she did go on, he opened his 
mouth and his eyes still wider. But then he stopped. 
The outer door had been opened, and feet were being wiped. 
That meant that Mr. Smeeth had arrived, and Mr. Smeeth 
liked to find Stanley busy during these first few minutes. 
So Stanley broke off, and dashed at a bit of work he had 
saved for this moment. 

' Good morning, everybody,' said Mr. Smeeth, putting 
down his hat and his folded newspaper, and then rubbing 
his hands. 'It 's getting a bit nippy in the mornings now, 
isn't it? Real autumn weather.' 


Ill 

You could tell at once by the way in which Mr. Smeeth 
entered the office that his attitude towards Twigg and 



24 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

Dersingham was quite different from that of his young 
colleagues. They came because they had to come; even 
if they rushed in, there was still a faint air of reluctance 
about them ; and there was something in their demeanour 
that suggested they knew quite well that they were shed- 
ding a part of themselves, and that the most valuable part, 
leaving it behind, somewhere near the street door, where it 
would wait for them to pick it up again when the day's 
work was done. In short, Messrs. Twigg and Dersingham 
had merely hired their services. But Mr. Smeeth obviously 
thought of himself as a real factor of the entity known as 
Twigg and Dersingham : he was their Mr. Smeeth. When 
he entered the office, he did not dwindle, he grew; he was 
more himself than he was in the street outside. Thus, he 
had a gratitude, a zest, an eagerness, that could not be 
found in the others, resenting as they did at heart the 
temporary loss of their larger and brighter selves. They 
merely came to earn their money, more or less. Mr. 
Smeeth came to work. 

His appearance was deceptive. He looked what he 
ought to have been, in the opinion of a few thousand hasty 
and foolish observers of this life, and what he was not — a 
grey drudge. They could easily see him as a drab ageing 
fellow for ever toiling away at figures of no importance, as 
a creature of the little foggy City street, of crusted ink-pots 
and dusty ledgers and day-books, as a typical troglodyte of 
this dingy and absurd civilization. Angel Pavement and 
its kind, too hot and airless in summer, too raw in winter, 
too wet in spring, and too smoky and foggy in autumn, as- 
sisted by long hours of artificial light, by hasty breakfasts 
and illusory lunches, by walks in boots made of sodden card- 
board and rides in germ-haunted buses, by fuss all day and 
worry at night, had blanched the whole man, had thinned 
his hair and turned it grey, wrinkled his forehead and the 
space at each side of his short grey moustache, put eye- 
glasses at one end of his nose and slightly sharpened and 
reddened the other end, and given him a prominent Adam's 
apple, drooping shoulders and a narrow chest, pains in his 
joints, a perpetual slight cough, and a hay-fevered look at 
least one week out of every ten. Nevertheless, he was not 
a grey drudge. He did not toil on hopelessly. On the con- 
trary, his days at the office were filled with important and 



THEY ARRIVE 


25 

exciting events, all the more important and exciting be- 
cause they were there in the light, for just beyond them, all 
round them, was the darkness in which lurked the one great 
fear, the fear that he might take part no longer in these 
events, that he might lose his job. Once he stopped 
being Twigg and Dersingham's cashier, what was he? He 
avoided the question by day, but sometimes at night, when 
he could not sleep, it came to him with all its force and 
dreadfully illuminated the darkness with little pictures of 
shabby and broken men, trudging round from office to 
office, haunting the Labour Exchanges and the newspaper 
rooms of Free Libraries, and gradually sinking into the 
workhouse and the gutter. 

This fear only threw into brighter relief his present 
position. He had spent years making neat little columns 
of figures, entering up ledgers and then balancing them, but 
this was not drudgery to him. He was a tjian of figures. 
He could handle them with astonishing dexterity and cer- 
tainty. In their small but perfected world, |ie moved with 
complete confidence and enjoyed himself. If you only 
took time and trouble enough, the figutejs would always 
work out and balance up, unlike life, whicfa you could not 
possibly manipulate so that it would work tout and balance 
up. Moreover, he loved the importance, the dignity, of 
his position. Thirty-five years had passed since he was an 
office boy, like Stanley, but a trifle smaller and younger; he 
was a boy from a poor home ; and in those days a clerkship 
in the City still meant something, cashiers and chief clerks 
still wore silk hats, and to occupy a safe stool and receive 
your hundred and fifty a year was to have arrived. Mr. 
Smeeth was now a cashier himself and he was still enjoying 
his arrival. Somewhere at the back of his mind, that little 
office boy still lived, to mark the wonder of it. Going round 
to the bank, where he was known and respected and told it 
was a fine day or a wet day, was part of the routine of his 
work, but even now it was something more than that, some- 
thing to be tasted by the mind and relished. The * Good 
morning, Mr. Smeeth, ' of the bank cashiers at the counter 
still gave him a secret little thrill. And, unless the day had 
gone very badly indeed, he never concluded it, locking the 
ledger, the cash-book, and the japanned box for petty cash, 
away in the safe and then filling and lighting his pipe, 



26 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

without being warmed by a feeling that he, Herbert Norman 
Smeeth, once a mere urchin, then office boy and junior clerk 
to Willoughby, Tyce and Bragg, then a clerk with the Im- 
perial Trading Co., then for two War years a lance-corporal 
in the orderly room of the depot of the Middlesex Regiment, 
and now Twigg and Dersingham's cashier for the last ten 
years, had triumphantly arrived. It was, when you came 
to think of it — as he had once boldly ventured to point out 
to a friendly fellow-boarder at Channel View, Eastbourne 
(they had stayed up rather late, after their wives had gone 
upstairs, to split a bottle of beer and exchange confidences) 
— quite a romance in its way. And the fear that grew in 
the dark and came closer to the edge of it to whisper to 
him, that fear did not make it any less of a romance. 

Mr. Smeeth now unlocked the safe, took out his books 
and the petty-cash box, looked over the correspondence and 
attended to that part meant for him, made a note that 
Brown and Gorstein, and North-Western and Trades Fur- 
nishing Co., and Nickman and Sons had not fulfilled their 
promises and sent cheques, dealt with the two small cheques 
that some other people had sent, gave Miss Matfield three 
letters to type, asked Turgis to telephone to Briggs 
Brothers and the London and North Eastern Railway, 
delighted Stanley by giving him a message to take out, 
and, in short, plunged into the day's work and set Twigg 
and Dersingham in motion, even though Twigg had been 
quiet and unstirring for years in Streatham Cemetery, and 
the present Mr. Dersingham was only in motion yet on 
the District Railway, on his way to the office. 

Stanley disappeared, as usual, like a shell from a gun, 
before Mr. Smeeth could possibly change his mind; Miss 
Matfield contemptuously rattled off her letters (the little 
ping of the typewriter bell sounding like a repeated ironical 
exclamation); Turgis talked down the telephone rather 
gloomily; and Mr. Smeeth made the neatest little figures, 
sometimes in pencil, sometimes in ink, and opened more and 
more books on his high desk. And for ten minutes or so, no 
word was spoken that had not immediate reference to the 
affairs of the office. 

They were interrupted by the entrance of yet another em- 
ployee of the firm. This was Goath, the senior traveller, 
whose job it was to visit all the cabinet-makers in London 



THEY ARRIVE 27 

and the home .counties and to persuade them to buy the 
veneers and inlays of Messrs. Twigg and Dersingham. He 
entered in the usual fashion, came trailing in, with one large 
flat foot feeling reluctantly for the new bit of ground and 
the other large flat foot equally reluctantly taking leave of 
the old bit of ground. He was smoking the usual cigarette, 
which left a faint and fading spurt of smoke vanishing hap- 
pily into nothing behind him. He wore the same shapeless 
old overcoat, bagging monstrously at the pockets, and he 
wore it in the same way, that is, almost hanging off his droop- 
ing shoulders. The familiar dusty bowler hat was tilted, not 
cheerfully but depressingly, back from his furrowed and 
pimply forehead. He did what he always did. He turned 
upon the activities of the office a dull and knowing eye, an eye 
like a wet morning in February, just as damp and grey and 
hopeless, and at once these activities seemed to dwindle, 
to shrink from it. Mr. Dersingham had often said to Mr. 
Smeeth, and Mr. Smeeth had often said to Mr. Dersingham, 
that what Goath didn't know about selling inlays and 
veneers and the like was not wdTth knowing. But when 
you looked at him standing there, it seemed as if what he 
did know was also not worth knowing: it had had such a 
bad effect upon him. Everything about Goath was the 
same as usual except his appearance at this hour, on this 
day, for Goath only called at the office, his base of 
operations, on certain days and this was not one of them. 

'Busy, aren’cher/ said Goath. It was not an inquiry. 
It was not a greeting, It was a kind of gloomy sneer. 

Mr. Smeeth laid down his pen. 'Hello, what are you 
doing here? ’ 

'Told to come/ replied Goath. 'Mr. Dersingham told 
me to come in this morning — wanted to see me.' 

'Oh, did he?' It was obvious from Mr. Smeeth’s tone 
that he did not like the look of this, quite apart from not 
liking the look of Mr. Goath, for which he can hardly be 
blamed. 

'He did. Why he did, I don't know,' Goath continued 
drearily, ‘so don’t ask me because I can’t tell you. He 
simply said, "Come here first thing in the morning the day 
after to-morrow" — that 's this morning now — and I 've 
come. And I 've got here too early, into the bargain.' 

*Mr. Dersingham didn’t tell me anything about it/ said 

* B 93* 



28 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

Mr. Smeeth, with the air of a man who liked to be told 
something about it. 

Goath gave a ferocious pull at the last half inch of his 
cigarette and made a horrible hissing noise. 'He wanted 
to make it a surprise — a pleasant little surprise for you all 
— that 's it.' And as he said this, he tried to make Miss 
Matfield, who had just got up from her machine, accept a 
friendly leer, but all that it encountered was a stare like a 
high wall with broken glass along the top. 

Mr. Smeeth ran a finger backwards and forwards along 
his lower lip, a trick of his in a reflective moment. Now 
that he had looked at it a little longer, he plainly liked it 
still less. But then, after a short pause, he brightened up. 
* Perhaps he 's got some new stuff to show you ? Perhaps 
he wants to ask you something about it ? * 

'Haven't heard of anything new. 1 'd have heard. It 
always gets round; everything gets round: “No good show- 
ing us that," they say. “Show us some of this new stuff. 
That 's what we want," they tell you. That 's what they 
say, soon enough. And they don't know what they want, 
not half their time, they don't. There 's fellers making 
furniture now — and making money out of it — who don't 
know a good bit of wood from a bit of oilcloth. How they 
get away with it/ Goath concluded mournfully, 'beats me/ 
'That's right, Goath,' said Mr. Smeeth. 'It beats me, 
too. It 's cheek that does it, really, that 's my opinion- 
cheek, and a bit of iuck. But honestly now, how are things 
going? You've been on the North London round this 
time, haven't you? How's it going? Better than last 
time, eh? ' 

'No/ the other replied, with all the satisfaction of the 
confirmed pessimist. ‘Worse/ He took off his bowler 
hat and for once examined it with the distaste it deserved. 
‘Much worse/ 

Mr. Smeeth's face fell at once, and he made a tut-tut- 
tutting noise. 4 That 's bad. ' 

'Bloody bad, I call it, if Ethel here '11 excuse me/ 

Miss Matfield turned on him at once. 'My name is 
Matfield/ she told him. 'If you want to say “bloody" 
you can, for all I care, but I 'm not “Ethel here" or Ethel 
anywhere else, and I don't intend to be/ 

*1 'm crushed/ said Goath, putting on a faint and entirely 



THEY ARRIVE 29 

repulsive air of vocal dandyism, ‘quite crushed/ But, 
being in his fifties, indeed, having apparently been in them 
almost longer than anybody else has ever been, and a 
hardened offender, he was not crushed. 

'That 's all right, Miss Matfield/ Mr. Smeeth told her, 
uncomfortably. And he gave Goath a warning little frown. 

'Well, as I was saying/ Goath continued, ‘things are 
rotten. I 've been in the trade thirty years, and I 've 
never known 'em worse. If the price is right, then the 
stuff 's wrong. And if the stuff 's right, the price 's wrong. 
And it 's mostly the price. They want it cheap now, 
want it given away, no mistake about it, though the money 
they 're getting for the finished article is more than ever. 
You look at what furniture 's fetching now, retail, and then 
go and hear some of 'em talk — make you sick. It would — 
make you sick.' 

‘I believe you,' Mr. Smeeth assured him earnestly. Then 
he hesitated. ‘But — after all — somebody must be selling 
veneers, even if the inlays have gone out a; bit. I mean, 
they 've got to buy it from somebody, haven't they ? ' 

‘Well, whether they have or they haven't, all I can say 
is, they 're not buying it from me. And I 've been going 
to some of 'em for twenty years. Yes, I have, young 
feller,' he added, for some unaccountable reason catching 
the eye of Turgis and talking to him quite sternly, ‘for 
twenty years. I was calling on some of them houses — 
Moses and Stott, f'r'instance — when you was a baby or 
nothing at all.' 

'It 's a long time, isn't it, Mr. Goath?' replied Turgis, 
proud to be noticed by such terrific seniority and rather 
proud, too, to think that though he might not be anybody 
of much importance even now, at least he was more than 
a baby or nothing at all. 

‘You 're right, young feller/ said Mr. Goath with heavy 
patronage, ‘it is a long time. Hello, is this him? ' 

But the person who had just opened the outer door and 
was now standing at the other side of the frosted glass par- 
tition was obviously not Mr. Dersingham, so Turgis, in the 
absence of Stanley, went out to discover the caller's business. 

'Good morning,' said a brisk but ingratiating voice. 
'Any typewriter supplies? Ribbons, carbons, wax stencil 
sheets, brushes, rubbers?' 



30 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

'Not this morning, thank you,' said Turgis. 

'Rubbers, brushes, stencil sheets, best quality papers, 
carbons ? Ribbons ? 1 

'No, not this morning/ 

'Well/ said the voice, a little less brisk and ingratiating 
now, 'if you should want any typewriter supplies any time, 
here 's my card. Good morning/ 

' It 's surprising the number of those chaps we get round/ 
said Mr. Smeeth, rather sadly, 'all trying to sell the same 
bits of things. If you bought anything, what would it 
amount to? A shilling or two, that 's all. It beats me 
how they make anything out of it. Smart, well-dressed 
chaps too, some of them. I don't know how they do it, 
I really don't/ 

' You 'd think that chap was making thousands a year/ 
said Turgis, speaking in an aggrieved tone, as if somehow 
his own shabbiness came into the question. 'He 's always 
all dressed up, spats and everything. He comes round 
here about once a fortnight and we 've never bought any- 
thing from him yet/ 

' He 's 'oping, that 's what he *s doing, just 'oping, like 
me,' Mr. Goath remarked grimly. 'Only it doesn't run to 
spats with me. I 'd better try 'em, then I might get a big 
order or two. " Here 's old Goath with spats on," they 'd 
be saying up Bethnal Green way. "We '11 have to give 
him an order now." P'r'aps they would. And then again, 
p'r'aps they wouldn't. Ah, well' — and he yawned hugely 
and kept his eyes closed even after the yawn was done— 
'I dunno, I dunno, I dunno.' He sent this rumbling 
away into the mournful distance. 'Fact is, some of these 
mornings my inside 's all wrong, dead rotten. Doctor says 
it 's liver — that 's all because I take a drop of whisky — 
but I say it 's 'eart. And whether it 's 'eart or liver, I 'm 
going to sit down/ 

The room sank into a kind of mild sadness, rather like 
that of the atmosphere outside, where rich autumn had 
been bleached and deadened into a mere smokiness and 
gathering grey twilight, in which the occasional smell of a 
sodden dead leaf came like a remembrance of another 
world, as startling as a spent arrow from some battle still 
raging in the sun. 

The faces of the three men — Mr. Smeeth's grey oval. 



THEY ARRIVE 31 

Goath's purpled pulp, Turgis's tarnished youth — sank with 
the room, were half frozen into immobility, and seemed for 
a moment or two to be vacant, staring into nothing. Miss 
Matfield, who had risen from her table, saw it all for one 
queer second tangled with a whole jumble of deathly 
images: they were all under a spell, powerless to stir while 
the sky rained soot, dust poured from every crevice, and 
cobwebs wound about them. She wanted to scream. 
Instead, quite without thinking, she swept off her table a 
little brass box crammed with paper fasteners, and the 
clatter it made restored her to her normal senses. 

'Sorry!' she cried harshly, stooping. 

'And I should think so,' said Goath. 

'That should be Mr. Dersingham,' said Mr. Smeeth, 
cocking an ear towards the approaching footsteps. 

Mr. Dersingham put his head inside the general office. 
'Good morning, everybody,' he cried. ' Yott 're here then, 
Goath. Are the letters in my room, Ttirgis? All right 
then, I '11 just have a peep at them, and then I want to see 
you, Goath, and you too, Smeeth. I '11 give you a shout 
when I 'm ready. Stanley about? All right — doesn't 
matter if he isn't. Send him in when he comes. I 've 
forgotten to buy some cigarettes. I may want you in 
about five minutes, Miss Matfield. And if a man called 
Bronse rings up for me, don't put him through. Tell him 
I 'm out. Gh — and I say — Smeeth, just make out a what- 
do - you - call - it, will you — a statement of outstanding 
accounts — you know, just rough and ready? I shall want 
that. Anything come this morning? It doesn't matter, 
though; you can tell me later.' 

'And if I know anything,' Mr. Goath mumbled, when the 
head of Mr. Dersingham had been withdrawn, ‘that won't 
take you long, Smeeth — telling how much you 've got in 
this morning.' 

'It won't,' said Mr. Smeeth cheerlessly. 


IV 

Seated at his table, looking through the morning 
letters, as he was now, Howard Bromport Dersingham 
might have been accepted as a typical specimen of the 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


32 

smart younger City man. At a first glance, he seemed the 
brother of all those smart younger City men who figure in 
advertisements, wearing unique collars, ties, suits, examin- 
ing the infallible watch, or looking at a vision of less 
successful men who have never taken the particular corre- 
spondence course. He looked much too good for Angel 
Pavement, where business is merely business and a rather 
haphazard and dusty affair at that. He would not have 
seemed out of place in one of those skyscrapers filled 
with terrifically efficient and successful operatives and ad- 
ministratives, in those regions where business is not at all a 
haphazard and dusty affair and takes on a solemn air, even 
a mystical tinge, as if it really explained the universe. It 
appeared absurd that such a fellow and all his concerns 
should be sandwiched between the Kwik-W or k Razor Blade 
Co. and the London and Counties Supply Stores. 

Another glance or two, however, would reveal the fact 
that he was only a rough, weakly unfinished sketch of the 
type. The hard-boiled eye, the chiselled nose, the severely 
controlled mouth, the masterful chin, all these were missing, 
and in their place were ordinary masculine English features, 
neither very good nor very bad, very strong nor very weak. 
Mr. Dersingham was a year or two under forty, tallish, 
fairly well built but beginning to sag a little ; his hair, which 
was now rapidly taking leave of him, was light brown, and 
his eyes light blue, and they neither sparkled nor pierced 
but just regarded the world blandly and amiably; he had 
retained one of those short pruned moustaches that crept 
under the noses of so many subalterns during the War; and 
he looked clean, healthy, and kind, but a trifle flabby and 
none too intelligent. It was only after the War, during 
which he had assisted, with rapidly diminishing enthusiasm, 
one of the new battalions of the Royal Fusiliers, that he 
had joined his uncle at Twigg and Dersingham's. Before 
the War he had tried various things with no particular 
success, though he liked to suggest that the War had 
almost ruined his prospects. (In strict fact, it had im- 
proved them, for his uncle would never have taken him 
into the business, and left it to him when he died, if he had 
not taken pity on him as a returned hero.) It had been 
the intention of his parents to send Howard Bromport to 
Oxford or Cambridge, but they had lost money suddenly 



THEY ARRIVE 


33 

and Howard Bromport, no scholar, had failed to obtain a 
scholarship, so he had been compelled to stroll into business. 
In spirit, however, he went on to the university, and thus 
he became one of those men who are haunted by a lost 
Oxford or Cambridge career. These are not the scholars or 
the brilliant athletes who have been denied their chance of 
distinction, but simply the fellows who have been robbed 
of an opportunity of acquiring more striped ties, college 
blazers, and tobacco jars decorated with college coats-of- 
arms, in short, the fervent freshmen who never have the 
freshman nonsense knocked out of them. They it is who 
turn into the essential public school 1 old boys/ Dersingham 
was a tremendous 'old boy/ He never missed a reunion, 
never failed to renew his stock of school ties. The public 
school spirit worked for ever in him. He was always ready 
to do the decent thing — and this was not hard, for he was 
really a decent, kindly soul, stupid though! he might be — 
not for your sake, not for his own, but ‘for^he sake of the 
old school/ Strictly speaking, that school, Worrell (one 
of the second-class public schools, fatally second-class but 
terrifically public-school), is not very old, fetit it has turned 
out so many fellows like Dersingham that it has acquired, 
by verbal association, the antiquity of Eton. Perhaps the 
shortest definition of Dersingham — and he himself would 
have asked for no other — was that he was an old Worrclian. 

He did not play games very well and was not even a 
good judge of them, but he liked nothing better than 
solemn long discussions about them, in which minor pedan- 
tries could be thrashed out to the bitter end. Still, he 
played golf nearly every week-end, a little lawn tennis, and 
when the Charlatans had to turn out a third side at cricket, 
he sometimes turned out with them, as a possible slow 
bowler. (For four weeks every year, he dropped the old 
Worrelian and wore the Charlatan tie.) He smoked 
considerable quantities of Sahib Straight Cut Virginia 
cigarettes, drank steadily but not too much for reasonable 
health and decency, delighted in detective and adventure 
stories, humorous anecdotes, jigging easy tunes, musical 
comedies, and good loud talk in which everybody agreed 
with everybody else except about things that could not 
matter very much to anybody, disliked literature, art, and 
music, cranks and fanatics of every kind, most foreigners, 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


34 

anything or anybody really mean or cruel (when he could 
see the meanness and cruelty), and all the opinions that 
newspaper editors asked him to dislike. He had one or 
two real friends, a host of acquaintances, and a wife and 
two children whom he did not understand but of whom he 
was genuinely fond. 

And now, after glancing through the letters, most of 
which were merely offers to sell him something he did not 
want, he sat on, stroking his ruddy cheek, looking puzzled, 
and feeling puzzled. After a few minutes of this, he took 
a sheet of paper and carefully made some notes upon it. 
He did this all the more carefully because he felt that 
somehow by writing down what was already in his head, 
he was really grappling hard with the problem. Having 
frowned at these notes for another minute of so, he shook 
himself, set his face in hard business-like lines, reached out 
for a cigarette and then remembered that there were none, 
and rang the bell. 

Miss Matfield appeared, or rather a note-book and pencil 
appeared, with a shadow of Miss Matfield in charge of them. 

' I 'm sorry. Miss Matfield/ said Mr. Dersingham, with 
true Old Worrelian courtesy. ‘ I 'd forgotten I 'd told you 
to come in. I think I 'd better see Mr. Smeeth and Mr. 
Goath first, and you can take down some letters afterwards. 
Will you ask them to come in — and then — er — just carry 
on with something, eh? * 

‘Very well/ said Miss Matfield. 

‘Good!’ said Mr. Dersingham. He never felt sure how 
he ought to handle Miss Matfield, quite apart from the fact 
that she seemed to him a rather formidable sort of girl. 
Her father, he knew, was a doctor, only a doctor in the 
country now, miles from anywhere, but he had once played 
scrum half with the Alsatians. Ordering about the 
daughter of a scrum half of the Alsatians, just as if she was 
some ordinary little tuppenny-ha'penny typist, was a 
ticklish business. And that was why Mr. Dersingham 
added * Good ! ' : it meant that he knew ail about the surgery 
and the Alsatians. 

‘You fellows had better sit down/ he said to Smeeth and 
Goath. 1 We may be some time over this. That 's right. 
Now wait a minute. Let me see, Goath, you 're making — 
what? Two hundred, plus commission, that 's it, isn't it? 



THEY ARRIVE 35 

And you, Smeeth, what are you getting now? Three- 
fifteen, isn't it? ' 

Mr. Smeeth, troubled, admitted that it was. He had 
seen what was coming all along, had seen it for days and 
days and horrible nights. 

'And what am I making?' Mr. Dersingham gave a 
short and embarrassed laugh. ' Well, you can imagine for 
yourself, Goath, and you know well enough, Smeeth. 
Just lately, I 've been making nothing, not a bean. Just 
paying expenses, that 's all.' 

'Er,' Mr. Goath began with a pessimistic rumble. 

‘Just a minute. Don't think I 'm beginning like this 
because I think you fellows are not earning all you make. 
I know you are. There 's no question about that. But 
we 've got to go into it all, haven't we? — got to see where 
we stand. I '11 tell you in strict confidence that if it 
hadn't been for my wife having a little money of her own, 
I couldn't have carried on as long as I have done. You 've 
only to look at the figures to see that for yourselves.' 

Here he stopped long enough to give Mr. Goath a chance 
of describing the state of the cabinet-making and whole- 
sale furnishing trades. As we have heard him already, we 
do not want to hear him again. It is sufficient to say that 
his theme was that if the price was right, the stuff wasn't, 
and if the stuff was right, the price wasn't, and that this 
theme was elaborated by many variations in the minor key. 
And something in the nature of a second subject, repeated 
continually in the bass, was added by the statement that 
the speaker had been thirty years in the trade. To all of 
which, Mr. Dersingham and Mr. Smeeth listened with 
gloomy attention. 

'Well,' said Mr. Dersingham, looking at his miserable 
little notes, ' we '11 have to go into all that later on. We 're 
getting the wood from all the same people we dealt with in 
my uncle's time — and in some cases we 're getting it on 
better terms than he did, isn't that so, Smeeth? ' 

'Ah, but there's more competition now, a lot more,' 
said Goath dejectedly. ‘More and more competition, 
that 's the way it is. Some of these people in the trade 
must be cutting it as fine as that ' — and he waggled a very 
dirty thumb-nail — ‘to get orders. Nearly giving it away. 
Pay when you like, too. Foreigners,' he added darkly. 



36 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

' that 's what we 're up against now, foreigners, coming 
over here to unload the stuff like mad. I met one coming 
out of Nickman's only yesterday morning, coming out as I 
was going in, and looking as pleased with himself as if 
he 'd just backed a dozen winners. German he was. 
Speaking English as good as you and me, and dressed all 
up to the nines, but German all over him. And he had 
backed the winners all right, you bet he had. Got a pocket 
full of orders, he had. What 's the good of having a war, 
I say, if it only means Germans coming over here and 
pinching trade right under our noses. Cor! — makes me 
sick — thirty years in the trade and tramping round week 
in and week out, and nothing doin' two-thirds o' the time, 
not a thing, and foreigners coming here with fur coats on — 
fur coats! Taking the bread right out of your mouth, 
that 's all they 're doing.' 

‘Quite so, Goath,' cried Mr. Dersingham. *1 don't say 
I 'm not with you there. But we can buy from Germany, 
just the same, and have been doing for some time, but it 's 
beginning to look as if we can't compete. That 's what I 
was going to talk about, to begin with. We shall have to 
try and do some cutting, too. It 's our only chance. And 
the only way to do that — I think you fellows will agree, 
especially you, Smeeth — is to reduce expenses. The — er 
— what's-its-name — er — overhead charges are too big/ 
Having found this word ‘overhead,' so suggestive of big 
business, of keen men piling up fortunes in forty-two story 
buildings, Mr. Dersingham clutched at it thankfully: it was 
a floating plank on the wide ocean of puzzle and muddle 
into which he had suddenly been plunged. ‘That’s it. 
The first thing, the very first thing, we 've got to do is to 
reduce the overheads in this business.' 

Mr. Smeeth tried to look very brisk and business-like, 
but he seemed greyer than ever, and there was a mournful 
droop in his voice. * Well, we can try, sir. But it won't 
be easy. We 're spending as little as we can, here in the 
office.' 

‘Dash it all, Smeeth, I know that.' Mr. Dersingham 
rubbed his cheek irritably. 'But we shall have to spend 
less. I don't want to do it — I want to do the decent thing 
by everybody here — but you see how it is, don't you. 
Must cut something down. Now look here, to begin with. 



THEY ARRIVE 


37 

there's Turgis. What's he getting? A hundred and 
seventy-five, isn't he? And Miss Matfield? We started 
her at three pounds a week, didn't we? ' 

'That 's right, Mr. Dersingham. It was less than she'd 
been getting before, but she said she 'd start at that with us, 
and then we 'd see about giving her a rise when she 'd settled 
down with us. She 's a very capable girl, very capable, and 
very intelligent, too, much better than the last we had; no 
comparison at all.' 

‘ And Turgis ? What about him ? ' 

'I can't really grumble, sir,' replied Mr. Smeeth. 'He 
does his best. He 's a bit careless sometimes, I '11 admit, 
and he's not to be trusted far with figures yet — you re- 
member the horrible mess he made of the books when I was 
on my holidays this year? — but as these boys go nowadays, 
he 's as good as the next. He doesn't take the interest in 
his work and in the firm that I did when I \yas his age, but 
then they don't these days, and that 's all you can say about 
it. Miss Matfield 's just the same, for that matter. She 
does her work all right, but she's not interested, doesn't 
think of herself, you might say, as one of the firm, but just 
comes in the morning, does what she 's told to do, and then 
goes in the evening.' 

‘Thinking about young men, that's what they are, all 
these typewriters,' said Goath. 'Young men and dancing 
and going to the pickshers, that 's what 's running in their 
'eads, and you can't expect anything else of 'em, not in my 
opinion. Cheeky with it, they are, too.' 

' Well, I 'm sorry, Smeeth, I really am, but I don't see any- 
thing else for it. One of them will have to go, either Turgis 
or Miss Matfield. We can't spare you, Smeeth ' 

'Thank you, sir.' And as he said it — quite simply and 
not with any touch of irony — Mr. Smeeth looked still greyer. 
Indeed, he shook a little. 

‘No question of it at all,' Mr. Dersingham continued, 
heartily, 'absolutely none. But we'll have to get rid of 
one of these two and divide the work between us. I '11 do 
something. I '11 begin to type my own letters. I '11 have 
a good shot at it anyhow. It 's a question now whether 
you 'd rather keep Turgis and let him do some of the letters 
or keep Miss Matfield and divide his work between the two 
of you. Stanley might do a bit more, too, if he 's got any 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


38 

sense. In any case, we must have a boy, so there 's no ques- 
tion of getting rid of him. Now what d' you think, Smeeth. 
Turgis or Miss Matfield? Nothing much in it, I know, but 
you ought to decide. You'll have most of the extra work 
yourself, I expect, when it gets down to brass tacks, though, 
mind you, I 'm going to do a lot more myself, if I've time, 
in the office.' 

Mr. Smeeth did not feel so bad as he had felt a minute 
ago, but he felt bad enough. He tried to give all his 
attention to the immediate problem, which was serious 
enough for him, for he knew very well that it was he who 
would have to do most of the extra work, but, try as he 
would, his mind wandered darkly. He could not pretend 
to himself now that such pitiful economies as these could 
stop the rot. He had seen it coming for months. The 
firm, his position, his very living, they were all crumbling 
away together. The next thing would be that he would 
have to accept a cut in salary. And the next thing after 
that would be finding himself outside, in Angel Pavement, 
with a hat on his head and no salary, no office, nothing. He 
hesitated, stammering something, rather painfully. 

‘I didn't want to spring it on you,' said Mr. Dersingham, 
•and I suppose you 'd really like a day or two to think it 
over.' 

‘Wouldn't think a minute if I was you,’ said Mr. Goath. 
‘Get rid of the girl, right away, without 'esitation. They 
never should have started girls in the City. The place has 
never been right since. Powderin' noses! Cups o' tea! 
You don't know where y' are.' 

‘I would like to think it over, Mr. Dersingham,' Mr. 
Smeeth told him slowly. ‘I don't want to get rid of the 
wrong one.' 

‘ I 'd like to get it settled to-day while we 're at it, but you 
think it over between now and five o'clock, and then we'll 
have another talk about it. All right then.' And Mr. 
Dersingham examined his notes again, and then looked 
very severe. ‘The next thing is this question of what- 
d'you-call-it — these rotters who won't pay up. You've 
made out a statement, have you ? ' 

But there was a knock at the door, and Stanley sidled in, 
a card in his hand. ‘ Somebody wants to see you, sir. ’ 

‘ I 'm busy. Who is it ? Shut the door/ He examined 



THEY ARRIVE 


39 

the card. ‘ Never heard of this chap. Look at this, Goath. 
Anybody you know ? What does he want ? ' 

'Wanted to speak to you, sir/ replied Stanley, looking 
very mysterious and important, with a hint of the ‘ shad- 
derer' in his manner. ‘Very important. That's what 
he said.’ 

'I'll bet he did,' said Mr. Dersingham, with a grin at the 
other two. ‘Probably wants to sell me some ridiculous 
office gadget. If he did, though, he 'd probably have some- 
thing about it on his card. This is a private card. Golspie, 
Golspie? No, I don't know him. Look here, Stanley, just 
tell him I 'm having a discussion — no, a thingumty — a con- 
ference, just now, but if it 's something really important, 
not trying to sell me typewriters and files and muck, I 'll 
see him soon. He can either call again or he can wait there. 
Tell him that.' 

Mr. Golspie decided to wait. 


v 

He was still waiting there, sitting in the little chair beside 
the door and behind the partition, ten minutes later. Some- 
times, Stanley and Turgis and Miss Matfield heard him stir 
and clear his throat. They also caught the fragrance of 
the excellent cigar he was smoking. Its fumes seemed to 
turn the office into a dull little box and their duties into 
the most mechanical and trivial tasks. There was some- 
thing rich and adventurous about that drifting luxuriant 
smoke. It unsettled them. 

' Who is he ? ' Turgis whispered. ‘ What 's he like ? ' 

Stanley crept nearer and curved a hand round his mouth. 
‘ He 's biggish and broad and got a big moustache,' he whis- 
pered in reply. ‘ D' you know what I bet he is? ' 

'No, I give it up.' 

'Inspector from Scotland Yard.' 

‘You've got 'em on the brain, you little chump,' said 
Turgis. ‘ Course he isn't.' 

‘Well, I'll betcher. He looks just like one. You go 
and have a look at him.' 

But Turgis was saved from this necessity, for the visitor 
suddenly marched into the office itself. 



40 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

* Where 's that boy ? ' he demanded. ' Oh, look here, just 
go in again and tell Mr. What's-it ' 

'Mr. Dersingham, sir/ said Stanley brightly, proud to 
serve Scotland Yard or anybody who suggested it. 

'Mr. Dersingham. Tell him I can’t wait much longer — 
I 'm not used to hanging about like this — and that if I go, 
I go, for good and all, and then he ’ll be sorry. D' you get 
that? All right then, trot off and .speak out. Wait a 
minute, though. He doesn’t know what I want, doesn't 
know who I am, so I 'd better show him I 'm not going to 
waste his time.' He took something out of the small 
dispatch case he was carrying, and the others recognized 
it at once as a sample book of veneers and inlays, a few 
square inches of each specimen wood, thin as cardboard, 
being fastened to each stout page. ’Now give him this, 
tell him to look it over, and say that 's what I 've come to 
talk about*. D' you understand ? ' 

Having thus dispatched the boy, Mr, Golspie stood there 
at ease, his feet wide apart, his big chest thrown out, 
coolly enjoying his cigar. It was one of the strictest rules 
of the place that casual callers were not allowed beyond the 
partition, and Turgis ought to have ordered him out of the 
office at once. But somehow Turgis felt that this was not a 
man to be ordered out of the office by him. 

’Not much of a place this, I must say/ Mr. Golspie 
observed, looking about him, then addressing Turgis. 'But 
they keep you pretty busy, eh ? ’ 

’Well, they do and they don’t/ Turgis mumbled. 'I 
mean to say, sometimes we ’re busy and sometimes we 're 
not. It all depends, you see.' 

'I don't see, but I ’ll take your word for it. Must be a 
dark hole, this, a bit later on, when you get the fogs. Too 
dark for my taste. Not enough air either. I like plenty of 
air, though God knows it 's not worth having when you get 
it, in this neighbourhood. What do they call this street? 
Angel Pavement, isn't it? That 's a dam' queer name for 
a street, though I 've known queerer names in my time. 
How did it get it, d' you know ? ' 

Turgis admitted that he didn’t. 

'Didn't suppose you would,’ the stranger told him. 

* Perhaps this young lady knows. They know everything 
nowadays.' 



THEY ARRIVE 


4i 

Miss Matfiekl looked up. 'No, I don't know/ she 
replied, with a hint of distaste in her tone. Then she bent 
her eyes to her work again. 'And I don't care.' 

‘No, you don't care/ said Mr. Golspie, bluff, hearty, and 
completely unabashed. 'I don't suppose you care tup- 
pence about the whole concern. Why should you , anyhow ? 
1 wouldn't, if I were a good-looking girl, not tuppence.' 

Miss Matfield looked up again, this time wearily, wrink- 
ling various parts of her face. Then she brought to bear 
upon this intruder the full force of her contemptuous gaze, 
which would instantly have routed Turgis, Mr. Smeeth, or 
Mr. Dersingham, and a great many other people of her 
acquaintance. On this objectionable man it had no effect 
at all. He stared hard at her, and then smiled, or rather 
grinned broadly. Defeated by such complete insensitive- 
ness, Miss Matfield made a gesture of annoyance, and. then 
went on with her work, without looking up&gain. 

'Now what the devil's that boy doing jn there!' Mr. 
Golspie boomed to Turgis. ‘You'd better go and see if 
they 've killed him. You needn't, though* : He 's coming.' 

He came, followed by Mr. Smeeth, who said: "I'm sorry 
you 've been kept waiting. Mr. Dersingham can see you 
now.' 

They waited until they heard the door close behind him 
before any of them spoke again. 

'What does he want, Mr. Smeeth? ' asked Turgis. 

'I don't know what he wants exactly, Turgis/ Mr. 
Smeeth replied. 'I take it he wants to sell us some stuff. 
He sent some good samples in, really first-class Mr. Dersing- 
ham and Goath said it was. I don't pretend to know much 
about it. But I expect the price will put it out of the 
question.' 

' He 's a funny sort of chap, isn’t he ? ' 

‘A loathsome brute!' cried Miss Matfield from her 
machine. ‘ Imagine working for a man like that ! Ghastly ! ' 

Mr. Smeeth regarded her thoughtfully, and then, after 
telling Stanley to get on with his work and if he hadn't 
any work to go and find some, he turned to regard Turgis 
equally thoughtfully. One of them had to go. Should 
he put it to them now ? Miss Matfield would probably not 
care very much — it was hard to imagine her caring, though 
she had been anxious enough to get the job — whereas 



42 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

Turgis, who had an oldish poverty-stricken father some- 
where up in the Midlands, lived in lodgings here in London, 
and was lucky if he had five pounds in all the world, would 
be very hard hit and would not easily find another job. 
It would have to be Miss Matfield. Yet Miss Matfield, who 
had a good education behind her, was the more promising 
worker of the two, and would take over some of Turgis's 
work and be glad to do it. Well, well, this wanted a bit 
more thinking about, and, in the meantime, there were a 
hundred and one little things to be done. 

The three in Mr. Dersingham's room remained there for 
the next half hour, giving no sign of their existence beyond 
an occasional rumble of voices. At the end of that time, 
the door opened, louder voices and a fresh reek of cigars 
invaded the general office, and Mr. Dersingham called out: 
'I say, Smeeth, we 're all going out. Shan’t be back before 
lunch. I '11 give you a ring if I 'm going to be any later.' 
And then they were gone, leaving Mr. Smeeth and Turgis 
staring at one another. The various lunch hours, begin- 
ning with Stanley's (he went to the Pavement Dining 
Rooms and had sausage and mash, after all), came and 
went, the afternoon wore on, and still there was no message 
from Mr. Dersingham or Goath. The crescendo of the last 
hour of the day, when Stanley turned berserk with the 
copying press and Turgis snarled at the telephone and then 
yelled into it, had begun when the message actually did 
arrive. 

‘Hello, is that you, ol' man — I mean, Smeeth? 
Dersingham speakin'.' Even through the telephone, a 
strangeness, a certain richness, could be remarked in Mr. 
Dersingham's voice. He seemed quite excited. 

‘Smeeth speaking, Mr. Dersingham.' 

‘Good, very good. Well, look here, Smeeth, I shan't be 
back this afternoon. Nothing important, is there? You 
just carry on then — and then — er — you know, finish off, 
sign anything that wants signing, then finish off, lock up, 
go home.' 

‘That '11 be all right, Mr. Dersingham. There 's nothing 
very important. But what about that business we talked 
about this morning? Yes, Turgis and Miss Matfield?' 

‘AH done with,' and the telephone seemed to chuckle. 
*No need to bother about that, not the slightest. Turgis 



THEY ARRIVE 


43 

stays. Miss Matfield stays. D' you know, Smeeth, that 
that girl's father played scrum half with the Alsatians? 
He did — same fella, Matfield. No, she stays. Both stay/ 

* I 'm very glad, sir,' said Mr. Smeeth, who really was glad, 
though perhaps he was mostly puzzled. There seemed to 
be no sense in all this. 

'Explain ev'rything in the morning, Smeeth/ continued 
the voice of Mr. Dersingham. ‘Only person who goes is 
Goath/ 

‘ What 1 I didn't catch that, sir/ ’ 

‘ Goath, Goath. We 've done with him. Goath 's fin- 
ished with. Don't want to see him again. If he comes 
for his money, pay him at once, d' you understand, Smeeth, 
at once, up to end of month. Then tell him — to clear 
— right out, right out.' 

‘But — but what 's happened, Mr. Dersingham? I don't 
understand/ 

‘Explain ev'rything in the morning. But you under- 
stand about Goath, eh ? Pay the blighter Off if he comes, 
finish with him. You understand that, ch? Righto. 
Carry on then, oP man/ 

Bewildered, Mr. Smeeth laid down the receiver and 
walked over to his desk. He had hardly time to collect 
his* thoughts and to begin to wonder whether he ought to 
say something to the others, when the door flew open, al- 
most like a vertical trap-door, to shoot into the middle of 
the office, where it suddenly stopped dead, the figure of a 
man. It was Goath. His ancient overcoat was still hang- 
ing from his shoulders as if it hardly belonged to him, but, 
on the other hand, his bowler hat, instead of being at the 
back of his head, was now tilted forward, giving him an un- 
usual and almost sinister look. His face was purpler than 
ever; his eyes were glaring; and his mouth was opening and 
shutting, as if he were an indignant fish. To say of Goath 
that he had been drinking was to say nothing, for he was 
obviously always drinking, but this time he had plainly had 
more than usual, or had been mixing his liquors. And his 
appearance, his manner, everything about him, was so 
extraordinary that everybody in the office stopped work 
at once to look at him. 

‘Smeeth/ the apparition cried in a thick, hoarse voice. 
‘You pay me my money, d' y' ear. Sala'y to end of mun' 



44 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

an' commision to yesserday. I've finished wi' Twigg an' 
Dersi'am, finished, finished — com-pletely/ Here he pro- 
duced a magnificent cutting gesture that nearly upset his 
balance. ‘I've finished wi' them. They finished wi' me. 
All over.' 

'Mr. Dersingham's just told me, Goath,' said Mr. Smeeth, 
looking at him in astonishment. ‘ And I '11 give you your 
money if you really want it now ' 

'Mus' 'ave it. Finished — com-pletely, com-pletely.' 

‘ But what 's happened ? ' 

'I'll tell you what's 'appened,' replied Goath, with tre- 
mendous solemnity, lowering his head so far that it looked 
as if his hat would fall off. ‘Go — Golspie, tha’s wha's 'ap- 
pened — Gol-sss-pie.’ 

' Who 's that ? Do you mean ? ' 

‘Feller came s'momin'.* 

'But what about him ? ' 

Goath now threw back his head and looked defiant. 
‘Mister Wha'sit bloody Gol-spie,' he announced with great 
deliberation, ‘tha's the feller. An' he's a— -devil. I tol' 
him, I tol' him, ‘Thirry years — thirry years — in the trade, 
tha's me." An' wha' did he say to tha'? Wha' did he 
bloody well say? ' 

‘Here, old man, steady, steady,' Mr. Smeeth cautioned 
him. 

4 Don't mind me,' said Miss Matfield coolly. ' Go on, Mr. 
Goath. What did he say ? Tell us all about it.' 

‘Never mind wha' he said,' cried Goath aggressively, glar- 
ing round at them all. ' Does'n' ma’er what '<? said. Who 
is 'e? Where 's 'e come from? With ’is drinks an' cigars! 
All ri' — very nice — drinks an' cigars — but anybody can buy 
drinks an' cigars, an' do buy drinks an' cigars and big 
lunches. It 's wha' I say — thirry years, don* forge' tha', 
thirry years — wha' I say tha' ma'ers. An' I say — wha's 
the game? — where's *e get this stuff from? — who tol' 'im 
to come here ? ' 

‘Yes, but what's this chap doing?’ Mr. Smeeth asked. 
'That 's what I want to know.' 

‘Bullyin’ an' twistin', tha's wha' 'e's doin',' replied 
Goath promptly, taking off his hat. 'An' he's got Mr. 
Dersi'am like tha', jus' like tha'.' And, to the intense de- 
light of Stanley, one hand fell heavily on the hat. ‘ It 's ju9' 



THEY ARRIVE 


45 

like wha's it — y' know — wha's it, wha's it? ' And to show 
what he did mean, Goath glared harder than ever and then 
wiggled his fingers in front of his eyes, directing them at 
Miss Matfield, who let out a sudden peal of laughter. 

'Hypnotism/ suggested Turgis. 

'Tha's ri', boy, tha's ri\ Hvp-no-tism. Jus* like tha'. 
But not me/ he continued, speaking very slowly and more 
distinctly now, * not me. I tell 'em what I think. Begins 
tellin' me I oughter to do this an' oughter do that, an' I 
won't 'ave it. I know the trade an' I speak my mind. 
An' another thing. If I don't like a feller, I don’t like 'im, 
and that finishes it. That feller comes 'ere, very well, I 
don't, I finish.' 

'Is he coming here? ' demanded Mr. Smeeth. 

'You '11 see, you '11 see, Smeeth. I say no more. Finish. 
You just let me 'ave my money.' , 

'All right, Goath,' said Mr. Smeeth, who had been jot- 
ting down some figures for the last minute or two. ' I won't 
keep you a minute. Then you 'd better get straight home, 
old man ' 

'Have no ’ome,' Goath announced, 'lodgings.' He 
lurched up to the desk, which was high en0i$gh for him to 
rest his elbows on the edge of it. ' That ’s the way, Smeeth, 
a nice lil cheque. I tell you, Smeeth, ol' man, you 've al- 
ways been decent to me, an' now I ’m sorry for you.' 

'Well, I 'm sorry too, Goath, and I must say I don't un- 
derstand what's happening at all. Mr. Dersingliam rang 
up and told me you were leaving. Are you sure it 's not all 
a mistake. I mean, you chaps seem to have — er — had 
rather a lot to-day, you know, and in the morning you 
might all feel different about it.' 

With an effort, Goath stood erect, and then held out 
his hand to Mr. Smeeth. 'No, no, I've finished. Shake 
hands, ol' man. See you again sometime. Meet some 
day — still in the trade, y' know, can't change after thirty 
years — have to stick to the trade. Goo'-bye, all.' And 
Goath, after removing the dent from his hat with one fierce 
jab, crammed it on the back of his head and, with a final 
wave of his hand, departed. 

'Well, this beats me/ Mr. Smeeth confessed. I can't 
make head or tail of it, I really can't/ 

' It looks as if that other chap is taking his place, don't 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


46 

you think/ said Turgis. * Though must I say he didn't look 
as if he wanted that sort of a job. I mean, he looked too 
smart and bossy/ 

‘ No, I don't think that 's it/ Mr. Smeeth told him. 

‘Thank the Lord, we 've seen the last of Mr. Goath, any- 
how I' cried Miss Matfield fervently. 'I loathed the sight 
of him, he always looked so dirty and dilapidated. I 'm 
sure he was a rotten man to have going round calling on 
people/ 

‘But what if the other chap comes?' said Turgis, grin- 
ning. 'You didn't like the look of him, did you? ' 

‘I should think not! I never thought of that/ She 
groaned as she stuck another sheet of paper into the type- 
writer. ‘What a life!' 

‘That 's right, let 's get finished. Turgis, Stanley, come 
on, get a move on,' said Mr. Smeeth sharply. And down 
below, in Angel Pavement, now a deep narrow pool of 
darkness sharply spangled with electric lights, you could 
hear a little host of other people finishing for the night, a 
final clatter of typewriters, a banging of doors, the hooting 
of homing cars, the sound of footsteps hurrying up the 
street towards liberty. 



CHAPTER II 


MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 
I 

Mr. Smeeth, still puzzling and pondering over the sullen 
departure of Mr. Goath and the arrival of this mysterious 
Mr. Golspie, put his books away for the night, and, as his 
habit was, pulled out his pipe and tobacco pouch. The 
others had gone, and the office was in darkness except for 
the solitary light above his desk. His pouch, one of those 
oilskin affairs, was nearly empty, and he had to take out 
the last crumbs in order to get a decent pipeful. He had 
just lit up, blown out the first few delicious clouds, and 
switched off his light, when the telephone rang sharply, 
urgently, in the gloom. As he groped bade to the re- 
ceiver, he felt almost frightened. What was coming now? 
He found himself wishing he had gone earlier, but never- 
theless he had not the strength of mind to ignore the 
telephone's peremptory challenge. 

‘Hello? 'he began. 

A huge voice cut him short, came roaring out of the dark. 
‘Look 'ere, Charlie, what abart makin’ it fifty? Carm on, 

yer gotter do it, ol’ son, yer can’t get away from it ’ 

'Wait a moment,' Mr. Smeeth told him. ‘This is Twigg 

and Dersingham. Who do you ’ 

‘I know, I know,’ the voice continued, smashing its way 
across London and entirely ignoring Mr. Smeeth's protest. 
'I know wotcher goin’ to say, but it '11 'ave to be fifty this 
time. I been talkin' ter Tommy Rawson s’aftemoon, an' 
'e says yer '11 be lucky if yer get it at that. “Tell Charlie 
from me,” 'e says, “ 'e won’t touch it under fifty an’ 'e '11 be 
lucky if 'e gets it at that.' Tommy’s own words them. An' 
I agree, I agree. N ar then, what d' yer say, Charlie ? ’ 

‘You 've got the wrong number,’ cried Mr. Smeeth. 

' What 's that ? I want Mr. Tggins.' 

‘There 's no Mr. Higgins here. This is Twigg and Der- 
singham.' 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


48 

* Wrong number again/ said the voice, disgusted. Ring 
off — for Gord's sake/ 

Mr. Smeeth, relieved, rang off with pleasure, and de- 
parted, chuckling a little. Who was Charlie, and what 
was it he had to pay fifty for, and why did Tommy Raw- 
son think he 'd be lucky if he got it ? ‘ Might easily be 

crooks/ he concluded, with a little romantic thrill, worthy 
of Stanley himself, and then smiled at himself. More 
likely to be fellows buying second-hand cars, loads of scrap 
iron, or something like that. At the bottom of the stairs, 
he ran into the tall fellow with the broad-brimmed hat, 
who was just coming out of his Kwik-Work Razor Blade 
place. 

The tall man nodded. 'Turning colder/ 

'Just a bit/ replied Mr. Smeeth heartily. These little 
encounters and recognitions pleased him, making him feel 
that he was somebody. ‘Not so bad, though, for the time 
of year/ 

' That ’s right. Business good ? ' 

'So-so. Not so good as it might be/ And then Mr. 
Smeeth let the tall man stride away down Angel Pave- 
ment, for he remembered that he was out of tobacco and 
so turned into the neighbouring shop, the one occupied by 
T. Benenden. 

Mr. Smeeth was one of T. Benenden’s regular customers, 
a patron (perhaps the only one) of T. Benenden’s Own Mix- 
ture ( Cool Sweet Smoking). 'No/ he liked to tell some fel- 
low pipe-smoker, 'I don’t fancy your ounce-packet stuff. 

I like my tobacco freshly mixed, y’ know, and so I always 
get it from a little shop near the office. It ’s the chap's 
own mixture and so it ‘s always fresh. Oh, fine stuff 1 — 
you try a pipeful — and very reasonable. Been getting it 
for years now. And the chap I get it from is a bit of a 
character in his way/ Saying this made Mr. Smeeth feel 
that he was a connoisseur of both good tobacco and human 
nature, and it gave an added flavour to his pipe, which 
could do with it after being charged with nothing but T. 
Benenden’s own mixture. It is hardly possible that he 
was right about the tobacco being ‘freshly mixed/ for 
though mixed — and well mixed — it may have been, it 
could not come from T. Benenden’s little shop, with its 
hundreds of dusty dummy packets, its row of battered tin 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 49 

canisters, its dilapidated weight scales, its dirty counter, 
its solitary wheezing gas mantle, its cobwebs and dark 
comers, and still be fresh. On the other hand, he was 
certainly right when he described T. Benenden himself 
as a bit of a character in his way. 

T. Benenden’ s way was that of the philosophical finan- 
cier turned shopkeeper. He was an oldish man who wore 
thick glasses (which only magnified eyes that protruded 
far enough without their help), a straggling pepper-and- 
salt beard, one of those old-fashioned single high collars 
and a starched front, and no tie. When Mr. Smeeth first 
visited the shop, years ago, he was at once startled and 
amused by this absence of tie, jumping to the conclusion 
that the man had forgotten his tie. Now, he would have 
been far more startled to see Benenden with a tie. He had 
often been tempted to ask the chap why he wore these for- 
mal collars and fronts and yet no tie, but somehow he had 
never dared. Benenden himself, though he was ready to 
talk on many subjects, never mentioned ties. Either he 
deliberately ignored them or he had never noticed the part 
these things were now playing in the world, simply did not 
understand about ties. What he did like tp talk about, 
perhaps because his shop was in the City, :was finance, a 
sort of Arabian Nights finance. He sat there behind his 
counter, steadily smoking his stock away, and peered at 
old copies of financial periodicals or the City news of ordi- 
nary papers, and out of this reading, and the bits of gossip 
he heard, and the grandiose muddle of his own mind, he 
concocted the most astonishing talk. It was difficult to buy 
an ounce of tobacco from him without his making you feel 
that the pair of you had just missed a fortune. 

As soon as he recognized Mr. Smeeth, T. Benenden very 
deliberately pulled down his scales and then placed on the 
counter the particular dirty old canister set apart for his 
own mixture. ‘The usual, I suppose, Mr. Smeeth?' he 
said, picking up the pouch and then smoothing it out on 
the counter. ‘I saw your chief this morning, the young 
fellow — Mr. Dersingham. Came in for some Sahibs . Got 
somebody with him too, new to me, well set up gentleman, 
with a good cigar in his mouth, a very good cigar. You '11 
know who I mean? ' 

‘He called this morning at the office,' said Mr. Smeeth. 



50 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

'Well, I didn't say anything,' Benenden continued, very 
seriously as he weighed out the tobacco. * It 's not my 
business to say anything. I don't say anything. But I 
keep my eyes open. And I said to myself, the minute they 
went out, "This looks to me as if Twigg and Dersingham's 
are moving on a bit. This has the look of a merging job, 
or a syndicate job, or a trust job. And," I said, "if Mr. 
Smeeth does happen to come in for the usual, I '11 put 
it straight to him. It 's no concern of mine, but he '11 tell 
me . I 'll test my judgment," I said.' 

'Sorry, Mr. Benenden,' said Mr. Smeeth, smiling at him, 
' but I ' ve nothing to tell you. I don't rightly know what 's 
happening, but you can depend on it, it 's nothing in that 
line.' 

'Then,' cried Benenden, quite passionately, rolling up 
the pouch and then slapping it down on the counter, 
'you're wrong. I don't mean you, Mr. Smeeth, I mean 
the firm. That 's the way things are going all the time 
now, Mr. Smeeth, big combinations — merging away till 
you don't know where you are — and sweeping the deck, 
until — dear me — there isn't a picking, not a crumb, left. 
You see what I mean? Now there 's a bit here in one of 
the papers — I was just reading it When you came in — and 
I don't suppose you 've seen it. Just a minute and I '11 
find it. Now here it is. Suppose, Mr. Smeeth, just sup- 
pose,' and here T. Benenden leaned across the counter and 
his eyes seemed colossal, ‘ I 'd come to you a fortnight 
since, a week since, and said to you, "What about picking 
up a bit on South Coast Laundries?" — what would you 
have said?' 

'I 'd have said it takes me all my time to pay my own 
laundry bill,’ Mr. Smeeth replied, much amused by this 
retort of his. 

T. Benenden made a slight gestive of contempt to show 
that this was mere trifling. Then he looked very solemn, 
very impressive. ' You 'd have said, "I can't be bothered 
with South Coast Laundries. I 'm not touching 'em — 
don't want 'em — take your South Coast Laundries away." 
And you 'd have been right — as far as you could see, then. 
But what happens, what happens? Read your paper. 
It's there, under my very 'and. Along comes a big 
merger — a bit of syndicate and trust work — and up they 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 51 

go, right up to the top — bang! Now — you see — you can't 
touch 'em. And there 's a feller here — you can see it in 
the paper — who's been clearing anything out of it — a 
hundred thousand, two hundred thousand — a clean sweep, 
made for life. And he 's not the only one, not a bit of it ! 
And we sit here, pretending to laugh at South Coast 
Laundries or whatever it might be, and what are we doing? 
We 're missing it, that 's what we 're doing, we 're missing 
it.' Here, a dramatic pause. 

‘And if your Mr. Dersingham isn't careful,' Benenden 
concluded, still impressive even if a trifle vague now, ‘ he ’s 
going to miss it. He wants to keep his eyes open. There 's 
one or two bits in this paper I 'd like to show him. Let 's 
see, what was it you gave me? Half a crown, wasn't it? 
That 's right then — one and six change. And good night 
to you , Mr. Smeeth.' And T. Benenden, after stooping 
down to the tiny gas-jet to relight his pipe, retired to his 
corner to ruminate. 

Mr. Smeeth made his way to Moorgate, where, as usual, 
he bought an evening paper and then climbed to the upper 
deck of a tram. There, when he was not being bumped 
by the conductor, jostled by outgoing and incoming 
passengers, thrown back or hurled forward by the tram 
itself, an irritable and only half tamed brute, he stared at 
the jogging print and tried to acquaint himself with the 
latest and most important news of the day. An excitable 
column and a half told him that a young musical comedy 
actress, whom he had never seen and had no particular 
desire to see, had got engaged, that it had been quite a 
romance, that she was very very happy and not sure yet 
whether she would leave the stage or not. Mr. Smeeth, 
not caring whether she left the stage or dropped dead on it, 
turned to another column. This discussed the problem of 
careers for married women, a problem that had been left 
absolutely untouched since the morning papers came out, 
ten hours before. It did not interest Mr. Smeeth, so he 
tried another column. This reported an action for divorce, 
in which it appeared that the petitioning wife had only been 
allowed a hundred and fifty pounds a year on which to 
dress herself. The judge had said that this seemed to him 
— a mere bachelor (laughter) — an adequate allowance, but 
the paper had collected the opinions of well-known society 
C93* 



52 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

hostesses, who all said it was not adequate. Mr. Smeeth, 
who found he could not share the editor's passionate interest 
in this topic, now tried another page, which promptly in- 
formed him that evening gowns would certainly be longer 
this winter, and then went on to tell him, to the tune of 
three solid columns, that the modern business girl (with her 
latch-key) had quite a different attitude towards marriage 
and therefore must not be confused with her grandmother 
(Victorian, with no latch-key). Mr. Smeeth, feeling sure 
that he had read all this before, passed on, and arrived at 
the sports page, where the prospects of certain women 
golfers were discussed at considerable length. Never 
having set eyes on any of these Amazons and not being 
interested in golf, Mr. Smeeth next tried the gossip columns. 
The tram was swaying now and the print fairly dancing, so 
that it was at the cost of some eye-strain and a light head- 
ache that he learned from these paragraphs that Lord 
Winthrop's brother, who was over six feet, intended to 
spend the winter in the West Indies, that the youngest son 
of Lady Nether Stowey could not only be seen very fre- 
quently at the Blue Pigeon Restaurant but was also 
renowned for the way in which he painted fans, that the 
member for the Tewborough Division, who must not be 
mistaken for Sir Adrian Putter, now in Egypt, had perhaps 
the best collection of teapots of any man in the House, 
and that he must not imagine, as so many people did, that 
Chingley Manor, where the fire had just occurred, was the 
Chingley Manor mentioned by Disraeli, for it was not, and 
the paragraphist, who seemed to go about a great deal, 
knew them both well. Indeed, he and his editor seemed 
to know all about everybody and everything, except Mr. 
Smeeth and all the other staring men on the tram, and the 
people they knew, and all their concerns and all the things 
in which they were interested. Nevertheless, Mr. Smeeth 
reflected, as he carefully folded the paper, there were a lot 
of things in it that his wife would like to read. They 
seemed to have stopped writing penny papers for men. 

Mr. Smeeth occupied a six-roomed house (with bath) in 
a street full of six-roomed houses (with baths), in that part 
of Stoke Newington that lies between the High Street and 
Clissold Park — to be precise, at the postal address: 17 
Chaucer Road, N. 16. Why the late Victorian speculative 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 53 

builder had fastened on Chaucer is a mystery, unless he had 
come to the conclusion that the Canterbury Pilgrims, who 
have never vanished from this island, might come to rest 
in the twentieth century behind his brick walls. But there 
it was, Chaucer Road, and Mr. Smeeth had once tried his 
hand at Chaucer, but what with one thing and another, the 
queer spelling and all that, had not made much of him. All 
that he remembered now was that Chaucer had called birds 
' Smally foulies,' and to this day, when he was in a waggish 
mood, Mr. Smeeth liked to bring in 'smally foulies/ only 
to be countered with 'You and your “smelly foulies”! * 
from a delighted Mrs. Smeeth. Towards 17 Chaucer Road, 
Mr. Smeeth now stepped out, swinging his folded news- 
paper, through the alternating lamplight and gloom, the 
crisping air, of the autumn evening. Dinner, with a cup ot 
tea to follow, awaited him, for during the week, Mr. Smeeth, 
like a wise man, preferred to dine when work was done for 
the day. 


11 

'Cut some off for George,' said Mrs. Smeeth, 'and I 'll 
keep it warm for him. He 's going to be late again. 
You 're a bit late yourself to-night, dad/ 

'I know. We 've had a funny day to-day/ replied Mr. 
Smeeth, but for the time being he did not pursue the subject. 
He was busy carving, and though it was only cold mutton 
he was carving, he liked to give it all his attention. 

'Now then, Edna/ cried Mrs. Smeeth to her daughter, 
‘don't sit there dreaming. Pass the potatoes and the 
greens — careful, they 're hot. And the mint sauce. Oh, 
I forgot it. Run and get it, that 's a good girl. All right, 
don't bother yourself. I can be there and back before 
you 've got your wits together.' 

Mr. Smeeth looked up from his carving and eyed Edna 
severely. ' Why didn't you go and get it when your mother 
told you? Letting her do everything.' 

His daughter pulled down her mouth and wriggled a 
little. * I 'd have gone,' she said, in a whining tone. ' Didn't 
give me time, that 's all.' 

Mr. Smeeth grunted impatiently. Edna annoyed him 
these days. He had been very fond of her when she was 



54 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

a child — and, for that matter, he was still fond of her — but 
now she had arrived at what seemed to him a very silly 
awkward age. She had a way of acting, of looking, of 
talking, all acquired fairly recently, that irritated him. 
An outsider might have come to the conclusion that Edna 
looked like a slightly soiled and cheapened elf. She was 
between seventeen and eighteen, a smallish girl, thin about 
the neck and shoulders but with sturdy legs. She had a 
broad snub nose, a little round mouth that was nearly 
always open, and greyish-greenish-bluish eyes set rather 
wide apart; and scores of faces exactly like hers, pert, 
prettyish, and undernourished, may be seen v'riiin a 
stone's throw of any picture theatre any evening in any 
large town. She had left school as soon as she could, and 
had wandered in and out of various jobs, the latest and 
steadiest of them being one as assistant in a big draper’s, 
Finsbury Park way. At home now, being neither child nor 
an adult, neither dependent nor independent, she was at 
her worst ; languid and complaining, shrill and resentful, or 
sullen and tearful; she would not eat properly; she did not 
want to help her mother, to do a bit of washing-up, to tidy 
her room ; and it was only when one of her silly little friends 
called, when she was going out, that she suddenly sprang 
into a vivid personal life of her own, became eager and 
vivacious. This contrast, as sharp as a sword, sometimes 
angered, sometimes saddened her father, who could not 
imagine how his home, for which he saw himself for ever 
planning and working, appeared in the eyes of fretful, 
secretive, and ambitious adolescence. These changes in 
Edna annoyed and worried him far more than they did 
Mrs. Smeeth, who only took offence when she had a solid 
grievance, and turned a tolerant, sagely feminine eye on 
what she called Edna’s ‘ airs and graces.’ 

There was a bustle and clatter, and Mrs. Smeeth re- 
turned to dump upon the table a little jug without a handle. 
'I 'm getting properly mixed up in my old age,' she an- 
nounced, breathlessly. 'First I thought it was there, in 
front of the bottom shelf. Then when I went, I thought I 
couldn't have made any, because it wasn’t there. And 
then — lo and behold — it was there all the time, right at the 
back of the second shelf. Oh, you 've given me too much, 
dad. Take some back. I 'm not a bit hungry somehow 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 55 

to-night, haven't been all day. You know how you get 
sometimes, can't fancy anything. Here, Edna, you want 
more than that. Well, I dare say you don't, but you 're 
going to have it, miss. None of this silly starving yourself, 
a girl your age! Because your mother doesn't feel hungry' 
for once in her life, it doesn't mean you're just going to sit 
there, pecking worse than a little sparrow.' And here she 
stopped, to take breath, to snatch Edna's plate and put 
some more meat on it, to sit down, to do half a dozen other 
things, all in a flash. 

According to all the literary formulas, the wife of Mr. 
Smeeth should have been a grey and withered suburban 
drudge, a creature who had long forgotten to care for any- 
thing but a few household tasks, the welfare of her children, 
and the opinion of one or two chapel-going neighbours, a 
mere husk of womanhood, in whom Mr. Smeeth could not 
recognize the girl he had once courted. But Nature, caring 
nothing for literary formulas, had gone to Vtork in another 
fashion with Mrs. Smeeth. There was nothing grey and 
withered about her. She was only in her early forties, and 
did not look a day older than her age, by any standards. 
She was a good deal plumper than the girl Mr. Smeeth had 
married, twenty-two years before, but she was no worse 
for that. She still had a great quantity of untidy brown 
hair, a bright blue eye, rosy cheeks, and a ripe moist lip. 
She came of robust country stock, and perhaps that is why 
she had been able to conjure any amount of bad food into 
healthy and jolly womanhood. By temperament, however, 
she was a real child of London, a daughter of Cockaigne. 
She adored oysters, fish and chips, an occasional bottle 
of stout or glass of port, cheerful gossip, hospitality, noise, 
jokes, sales, outings, comic songs, entertainments of any 
kind, in fact, the whole rattling and roaring, laughing 
and crying world of food and drink and bargaining and 
adventure and concupiscence. She liked to spend as much 
money as she could, but apart from that, would have been 
quite happy if the Smeeths had dropped to a lower social 
level. She never shared any of her husband's worries, and 
was indeed rather impatient of them, sometimes openly 
contemptuous, but she had no contempt, beyond that ex- 
perienced by all deeply feminine natures for the male, for 
the man himself. He had been her sweetheart, he was her 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


56 

husband; he had given her innumerable pleasures, had 
looked after her, had been patient with her, had always 
been fond of her; and she loved him and was proud of what 
9eemed to her his cleverness. She knew enough about life 
to realize that Smeeth was a really good husband and that 
this was something to be thankful for. (North London 
does not form any part of that small hot-house world in 
which a good husband or wife is regarded as a bore, perhaps 
as an obstacle in the path of the partner’s-aelf-develcpment.) 
Chastity for its own sake made no appeal to her, and she 
recognized with inward pleasure (though not with any 
outward sign) the glances that flirtatious and challenging 
males, in buses and shops and tea-rooms, threw in her 
direction. If Mr. Smeeth had started any little games — as 
she frankly confessed — she would not have moaned and 
repined, but would have promptly 'shown him' what she 
could do in that line. As it was, he did not require show- 
ing. • He grumbled sometimes at her extravagance, her 
thoughtlessness, her rather slapdash housekeeping, but in 
spite of all that, in spite too of the fact that for two-and- 
twenty years they had been cooped up together in tiny 
houses, she still seemed to him an adorable person, at once 
incredible and delightful in the large, wilful, intriguing, 
mysterious mass of her femininity, the Woman among the 
almost indistinguishable crowd of mere women. 

' And if this pudding tastes like nothing on earth/ cried 
Mrs. Smeeth, rushing it on to the tabic, ' don't blame me, 
blame Mrs. Newark at number twenty-three. She came 
charging in, like a lire brigade, just as I was in the middle 
of mixing it, and shrieked at me — you know what a voice 
she has? — she said, ‘What d'you think, Mrs. Smeeth!' 
And I said, ‘ I 'm sure I don't know, Mrs. Newark. What is 
it this time?" I slipped that in just to remind her it 
wasn't the first time she 'd nearly frightened the life out of 
me, breaking the news about nothing. "Well," she said- 
just a minute, mind your hand, dad, that 's hot. Pass the 
custard, Edna. Dad wants it. That 's right/ And Mrs. 
Smeeth sat’ down, flushed and panting. 

'Bit on the heavy side, p'raps,' said Mr. Smeeth, who 
had now tasted his pudding, ' but I 've had worse from you, 
mother, much worse.' Another spoonful. 'Not so bad 
at ail/ 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 57 

'No, it isn't, is it? ' his wife replied. 'But if it isn't, it 
ought to be. I thought Mrs. Screaming Twenty-three had 
done it in properly. "Well," she said, and nearly bursting 
she was, "do you know, Mrs. S neeth, I 've had a letter 
from Albert, and he 's been in hospital in Rangoon, and 
now he 's all right, and the letter came not ten minutes 
since." "You don't say!" I said. "Where 's he been in 
hospital?" And she said "Rangoo-oon" — just like that. 
Reminded me of that Harry Tate sketch, you remember, 
dad? Rangoo-oon 1 I nearly laughed in her face. And 
talk about sketches! If you want a sketch you couldn't 
beat this Albert she 's making so much fuss about. 'Mem- 
ber him, Edna? — teeth sticking out a yard, and all cross- 
eyed. They saw something in Rangoo-oon when they saw 
Albert.' 

‘ Oo, he was sorful,' cried Edna, shuddering in a refined way. 

'Still, we can't all be oil paintings,' Mrs. Smeeth re- 
marked philosophically. Then she looked mischievous. 
4 And we can't all look like Mr. Ronald Mawlborough either.' 

'Who 's he when he 's at home? ' Mr. Sn&eeth inquired. 

'There you are, you see, dad, you 're not up in these 
things. You're behind the times. Matter of fact, you 
have seen him, 'cos I remember the two of us seeing him 
together, in that picture at the Empire.' 

'Oh, one of those movie chaps, is he? ' Mr. Smeeth was 
obviously more interested in pudding than in movie chaps. 

'I should think he is, isn't he, Edna? ' 

'Oh, do shut up, mother,' cried Edna, crimson now and 
wriggling. 

'What 's this about ? ' 

'He's the latest, isn't he, Edna?' said Mrs. Smeeth 
wickedly. ' And I must say he 's a good-looking young 
fellow — curly hair, dark eyes, and all that. Free with his 
photographs too. Yours sincerely, Ronald Mawlborough, 
that 's him. Nothing stand-offish about him when he 
addresses his sweet young admirers ' 

' Mother 1' Edna screamed, nothing now but two implor- 
ing eyes in a scarlet face. 

‘That's what comes of not doing your bedroom out, 
miss,' her mother retorted. 'I go up to her bedroom, dad, 
and what do I find? Mr. Ronald Mawlborough, hers 
sincerely, on a big photo. You can nearly count his 



58 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

eyelashes. That 's the latest now. Not content with 
cutting ’em out of these movie papers, they send to Holly- 
wood for them. Darling Mr. Ronald, they write, I shall 
die if you don't send me your photo, signed in your own 
sweet handwriting. Yours truly, Edna Smeeth, seventeen 
Chaucer Road, Stoke Newington, England.' 

Mr. Smeeth looked severe. 'Well, I must say, Edna, I 
call that a silly game.' 

'I only did it for fun,' she muttered, 'just to see what 
would happen, that 's all. Some of our girls have got 
dozens * 

'Pity they 've got nothing better to do,' was her father's 
comment. 

'Oh, well, they might be doing worse,* said Mrs. Smeeth, 
rising from the table. 'It won't do them any good, but 
it won't do them any harm either. We 've all been a bit 
silly in our time. I 'm sure I was when I was a girl. Girls 
are a bit silly, if you ask me, and it 's a good job for the men 
they are. But that doesn't mean they can't help to clear a 
table . Come on, Edna, get these things away while I 
make the tea.’ 

‘Oh, all ri-ight,' Edna sighed wearily, and rose in slow- 
motion time. Ten minutes later, after gulping down her 
tea, she rushed out of the room, leaving her parents sitting 
at ease, Mrs. Smeeth over her second cup of tea, Mr. Smeeth 
over his pipe. 

The room was small and contained far too much furniture 
and too many knick-knacks. Nearly everything in it was 
shoddy and ugly, manufactured hastily, in the mass, to 
catch a badly-informed eye, to be bought and exhibited for 
a brief season by the purchaser, and then to be in the way 
and finally rot out of the way. Nevertheless, the total 
effect of the room was not displeasing, because it had a 
cosy, homelike atmosphere, which Mr. Smeeth, whose 
imagination, heightened by fear, perhaps told him that 
outside beyond the firelight and the snug walls were stalking 
poverty, disgrace, shame, disease, and death, enjoyed even 
more than Mrs. Smeeth. It was probably this feeling, and 
not so much the strain of the day's work, that made him a 
man difficult to rouse and get out of the house in the even- 
ing, as his wife, who was all for going out somewhere, or, 
fading that, inviting somebody in, knew to her cost. 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 59 

'You 're an old home-bird, you are/ she said, with a sort 
of affectionate contempt, as she saw him settling deeper now 
into his chair. 'Well, what 's been bothering you to-day? 
You started to tell me and then didn't/ 

'I got a real fright this morning, I don't mind telling 
you, Edie,' he began. 4 Not that I hadn't seen it coming 
the way things were going on,' he added, with a gloomy 
pride. 

'Now then, don’t start on,' she warned him, shaking a 
teaspoon. 'You see too much coming. Always looking 
into the middle of next week and noticing how black it 's 
getting. Talk about depressions in Iceland 1 They ought 
to give you the job, and then there 'd be plenty. How- 
ever, go on, my dear. Mustn't interrupt.' 

'Well, somebody's got to look, haven't they?' he re- 
plied. 'And if Mr. Dersingham had looked a bit harder, 
we 'd all be better off.* 

' Do you mean to say you won't get that rise at Christ- 
mas he was talking about ? ' 

'Rise at Christmas! I thought this momiijg I was in foi 
a rise outside. I tell you, Edie, when he started, my head 
went into my boots.' And he plunged into an account of 
the scene in Mr. Dersingham’s room that morning and then 
discussed the mysterious events that followed it, all of 
which Mrs. Smeeth punctuated with nods and ejaculations, 
such as ‘Did he really?' ‘Well, I never!' and ‘Silly old 
geezer!' She gave him more of her attention than she 
usually did, because she could see that he was seriously 
concerned, but at the same time she did not really bother 
her own head about it, as he knew very well. To her it 
was all rather unreal, and he was convinced that the idea 
that he might lose his job, be thrown into the street with 
only the gloomiest prospect of getting anything half as 
good, never really entered her head. And this indiffer- 
ence, this childlike confidence in his ability to produce the 
usual six or seven pounds every week, did nothing to re- 
store his own self-confidence, at least not at such moments 
as these, but only made him feel that he had to think for 
two, and in the end left him lonely with his fear. 

' All I 'm hoping now,' he went on, earnestly, 'is that this 
chap who called has got something up his sleeve. It 's so 
funny Goath going like that. Looks to me as if this chap, 

♦C93* 



60 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

Golspie, thought Goath wasn't any good — and I 've thought 
so once or twice myself lately — and worked it so that Mr. 
Dersingham got rid of him. Perhaps he 's going to take 
his place. I must say, it 's a funny business. In all my 
experience ' 

‘Don't you worry, it '11 be all right,' cried Mrs. Smeeth. 
‘We 're going to be lucky, we are. I don't care if Mr. Der- 
singham goes mental, we 're going to be lucky. Soon too! 
I don't think I told you, but Mrs. Dalby's sister — the one 
with the fringe and the jet ear-rings, who reads the cards — 
told me my fortune the other afternoon, and she said luck 
was coming, money and good luck, and all through a 
stranger, a middling-coloured man in a strange bed. Is 
this man you 're talking about middling-coloured? ' 

* Don't ask me, I never noticed what colour he was. He 
hadn't any colour. He 'd got a big moustache, if that 's 
any use to you. But what puzzles me is this, why did Mr. 
Dersingham ' 

‘Don't you worry yourself, dad, why Mr. Dersingham did 
anything,' his wife interrupted. ‘Think he 's spending his 
time worrying about you ? Not him ! And don't you bother 
your old head about him, either. Let 's have a bit o' 
music. It '11 cheer us up.' She bounced over to the 
corner in which George, who had a head for these things, 
had fixed up that tangle of wires which still passes by the 
name of ‘wireless/ a loud-speaker apparatus. ‘What 
starts it? I can never remember,' she said, with one hand 
hovering over the various knobs. ‘ Is it this thing you pull 
out?' 

It must have been, for she pulled it, and immediately a 
loud, patronizing voice filled the room. ‘Let us turn to 
anothuh aspect of this problam,' it shouted. ‘As we have 
already seen — ah — a company cannot barrow unless it is 
aixpressly authorized — that is, authorized by its memo- 
randum of association — ah — to do so. Let us see what 
this invalves. Suppose a company has been formed for 
the purpose — we will say — ah — of discounting cammercial 
bills * 

‘Oh, help!' cried Mrs. Smeeth, and promptly turned the 
voice out of the room. ‘A lot of cheering up you 'U do! ' 
she told the loud speaker severely. ‘Look in the paper 
and see when the singing and playing come§ on.' 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 61 

There was a glimpse of Edna, all dressed up, very white 
about the nose, very red about the lips. 

'Where you ’re going, Edna? * her mother shrieked. 

'Out.’ 

'Who with?’ 

' Minnie Watson.’ 

‘Well, don’t be late then, you and your Minnie Watson.’ 
A bang of the front door was Edna’s only reply. ‘ It 's 
Minnie Watson ev’ry night now,’ said Mrs. Smeeth. 'Next 
month it ‘11 be all somebody else. I said to her last night, 
4 Where’s Annie Frost now you used to be so friendly with? ’ 

' Is that Frost’s girl? ’ inquired Mr. Smeeth. 'The chap 
who keeps the Hand and Glove. ’ 

‘That’s right, Jimmy Frost. So when I said that to her, 
the little madam turns up her nose and says, "Catch me 
going with Annie Frost! " Just like that. And it doesn’t 
seem a minute since they were as thick as thieves. I could 
have died laughing. Just the same, I was, at her age.' 

'You won’t make me believe that,' said Mr. Smeeth 
sturdily. ' You 'd more sense. Seems to Hie these young 
girls now haven't a scrap of sense. The bit they leave school 
with is knocked out of them by pictures nowadays. They 
think about pictures — movies and talkies-^-from morning 
till night. They ’re getting jazzed off their little heads.’ 

'That sounds like Georgie,' cried Mrs. Smeeth, starting 
up. ' I ’ll go and get his dinner out of the oven. Come 
on, boy, hurry up if you want any dinner to-night. It 's 
nearly cinders now.’ 

Left to himself, Mr. Smeeth slowly knocked out his pipe 
in the coal-scuttle and then stared into the fire, brooding. 
He was always catching himself grumbling about the 
children now, and he did not want to be a grumbling 
father. He had enjoyed them when they were young, but 
now, although there were times when he felt a touch of 
pride, he no longer understood them. George especially, 
the elder of the two, and once a very bright promising boy, 
was both a disappointment and a mystery. George had 
had opportunities that he himself had never had. But 
George had shown an inclination, from the first, to go his 
own way, which seemed to Mr. Smeeth a very poor way. 
He had no desire to stick to anything, to serve somebody 
faithfully, to work himself steadily up to a good safe 



62 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

position. He simply tried one thing after another, selling 
wireless sets, helping some pal in a garage (he was in a 
garage now, and it was his fourth or fifth), and though he 
always contrived to earn something and appeared to work 
hard enough, he was not, in his father's opinion, getting 
anywhere. He was only twenty, of course, and there was 
time, but Mr. Smeeth, who knew very well that George 
would continue to go his own way without any reference 
to him, did not see any possibility of improvement. The 
point was, that to George, there was nothing wrong, and his 
father was well aware of the fact that he could not make 
him see there was anything wrong. That was the trouble 
with both his children. There was obviously nothing bad 
about either of them; they compared very favourably with 
other people's boys and girls ; and he would have been quick 
to defend them ; but nevertheless they were growing up to 
be men and women he could not understand, just as if 
they were foreigners. And it was all very perplexing and 
vaguely saddening. 

The truth was, of course, that Mr. Smeeth's children 
were foreigners, not simply because they belonged to a 
younger generation but because they belonged to a younger 
generation that existed in a different world. Mr. Smeeth 
was perplexed because he applied to them standards they 
did not recognize. They were the product of a changing 
civilization, creatures of the post-War world. They had 
grown up to the sound of the Ford car rattling down the 
street, and that Ford car had gone rattling away, to the 
communal rubbish heap, with a whole load of ideas that 
seemed still of supreme importance to Mr. Smeeth. They 
were the children of the Woolworth Stores and the moving 
pictures. Their world was at once larger and shallower 
than that of their parents. They were less English, more 
cosmopolitan. Mr. Smeeth could not understand George 
and Edna, but a host of youths and girls in New York, 
Paris, and Berlin would have understood them at a glance. 
Edna's appearance, her grimaces and gestures, were tem- 
porarily based on those of an Americanized Polish Jewess, 
who, from her mint in Hollywood, had stamped them on 
these young girls all over the world. George's knowing 
eye for a machine, his cigarette and drooping eyelid, his 
sleek hair, his ties and shoes and suits, the smallest details 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 63 

of his motor-cycling and dancing, his staccato impersonal 
talk, his huge indifferences, could be matched almost 
exactly round every corner in any American city or 
European capital. 

Mrs. Smeeth returned with the food, and a minute or two 
later, George descended from his bedroom, shining, sleek, 
brushed. He was better looking, better built, tougher in 
body, than his father had ever been, and he owed far more 
to his mother, though there was about her a certain gener- 
osity of the blood, a suggestion of ruddy mounting sap, that 
was absent in him: he was drier, more compressed and 
blanched; and though he was a good-looking youth, who 
moved easily, quickly, he had hardty any more of the 
bloom of twenty than had the moving pictures of Mr. 
Ronald Mawlborough and his kind. In short, he looked 
too old for an English boy of that age. It was as if the 
Americanized world he had grown up to discover about 
him, had contrived to introduce into North London the 
drying and ageing American climate. 

'You 're late to-night, George,' said his farther. 

'Been busy,' he replied, dispatching his dinner quickly, 
quietly, efficiently, but with no signs of taking any pleasure 
in his food. After a few minutes' silence, he continued. 
* Feller came in with an old Lumbden, twelve horse. Could 
have had it for fifteen quid. Nothing much wrong with it. 
Wanted new plugs and mag. and brakes re-lining and 
something doing to the differential, and just cleanin' up a 
bit. All right then. Take you anywhere. Thought once 
of sellin' the ol* bike and having a shot at this Lumbden .' 

'I wish you would, Georgie,' cried Mrs. Smeeth. 'You 
could take us all out then. See us going out in style, eh, 
dad? Besides, I hate that stinking rattling ol' bike of 
yours. Nasty dangerous things they are too. Get rid of 
it, Georgie, before it gets rid of you.' 

‘That 's all right,' said George, ‘but the ol' bike goes — 
travels like a bird. This Lumbden couldn't look at her. 
No, me for the little ol' bike, till I can put my hand on 
something in the super-sports style. And don't worry, I 
shan't do that in a hurry — costs too much. Doesn't 
matter, though — Barrett 's buying this Lumbden . We '11 do 
her up a bit, paint her up, and sell her. There won't be 
any hurry either, so when we 've put a few works in her, if 



64 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

you want a ride, pass the word on, and we 'll have a run 
in her/ 

* We 'll go down to Brighton and see your aunt Flo/ 
cried Mrs. Smeeth, her eyes brightening at the thought of 
an outing. 'Now don't forget, Georgie boy. That's a 
promise to your old mother. Don’t go spending all your 
time taking the girls out in it. Give your mother a chance. 
She can enjoy a ride as well as the next/ 

‘Righto/ said George briskly. He rose from the table. 

‘Here, you want some pudding/ 

‘Not to-night. Off pudding to-night. Couldn't look it 
in the face. 'Sides, I haven’t time/ 

‘Time!' cried his mother. ‘You're never in. Where 
you going? ' 

‘Out/ 

'Out where?' 

'Just knocking about with some of the fellers.' 

Mr. Smeeth looked at him, rather gravely. He felt it 
was his turn to speak now. ‘Just a minute/ he said 
sharply. ‘What does “knocking about" mean exactly, 
may I ask ? ' 

At this, George looked a shade less confident, a trifle 
younger, as he stood there tapping his cigarette. ‘ I dunno. 
Might do one thing, might do another. Might have a game 
of billiards at the Institute, or look in at the pictures, or 
go down to the second house at Finsbury Park. Depends 
what everybody wants to do. No harm in that, dad/ 
He lit his cigarette. 

‘Course there isn’t/ said Mrs. Smeeth. ‘Your father 
never said there was.' 

‘No, I didn't/ said Mr. Smeeth slowly. ‘That 's all 
right, George. Only don't take all night about it, that 's 
all. Oh! — there's just another thing/ He hesitated a 
moment. ‘ Somebody told me he ’d seen you once or 
twice with that flash bookie chap — what's his name? — 
y' know — Shandon. Well, you keep away from that chap, 
George. I don't interfere — and you know I don't — but 
that chap 's a wrong 'un, and I don’t want to see a boy of 
mine in his company/ 

‘Shandon 's no friend of mine,' said George, flushing. 
‘ I don't knock about with him. He comes into the garage 
sometimes, that 's all. He 's a friend of Barrett's/ 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 65 

'Well, if half of what I hear 's true,* Mr. Smeeth re- 
marked, 'he 's a friend to nobody, that chap. And you 
just keep out of his way, George, see? ' 

‘First I 've heard of this/ said Mrs. Smeeth, looking 
severely at her son. 

'All ri\ dad/ George muttered, nodding. 'So long, ma.’ 
And he was off. 

Mrs. Smeeth promptly rushed the remaining dirty plates 
into the kitchen, and then returned, five minutes later, to 
find her husband looking at a battered copy of a detective 
story that had somehow found its way into the room. You 
could not say he was reading it. So far, he was merely 
glancing suspiciously at it. Mrs. Smeeth took up the even- 
ing paper, pecked at it here and there, then pottered about 
a minute or two, then turned on the wireless, which only 
let loose another patronizing gentleman, switched it off, 
brought two socks and some darning wool from the top of 
the little bookcase, examined them with distaste, looked 
across at her husband, then said: 'I can't Settle down to 
anything to-night, somehow. How d' your feel about a 
little walk round ? We might look in at Fred's for an hour. 
What d'you say? Oh, no, I thought not~won't stir, the 
old stick-in-the-mud. One of these days 1 11 be finding a 
nice young man to take me to the pictures. Well, if you 
won't stir, I will. I think I '11 just clip round to Mrs. 
Dalby's for an hour. She asked me if I would.' 

‘You do/ said Mr. Smeeth. 'I 'm all right here.' 

He lit his pipe again, made up the fire, and tried to settle 
•down with the detective story, which at once hustled him 
into the library of the old Manor House, where the baronet's 
body was waiting to be discovered. But he did not make 
much headway with it. Goath and Mr. Dersingham and 
this Golspie kept appearing in that library. Angel Pave- 
ment was just outside the old Manor House. So he put the 
book away and tried the wireless. This time the patroniz- 
ing gentlemen had all gone home, and in their place was a 
rich and adventurous flood of sound. It was not un- 
familiar to Mr. Smeeth, and, after a pleasant tussle with his 
memory, he recognized it as something by Mendelssohn, an 
overture it was, a sea piece, either What's- It's Cave 
or Hebrides or something. Unlike his wife and children 
and most of his friends, Mr. Smeeth had a genuine, if 



66 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

unambitious, passion for music, and this was the kind of 
music he knew and liked best. He sank into his chair, and 
the sharp lines on his face softened as the music came swirl- 
ing out of the little cone and there arrived with it the old 
mysterious enchantment of the ear. A phantom sea rolled 
about his chair: the room was filled with foam and salt air, 
the green glitter of the waves, the white flash and the crying 
of great sea birds. And Mr. Smeeth, a magically drowned 
man, worried no longer, and for a brief space was happy. 


hi 

The next day Mr. Smeeth struggled out of sleep to find 
himself faced with one of those dark spouting mornings 
which burst over unhappy London like gigantic bombs 
filled with dirty water. At the first sign of the approach 
of one of these outrages, all clocks ought to be put back 
three hours, so that everybody might stay in bed until their 
fury is spent. There is no end to their malice. They 
sweep, lash, and machine-gun the streets with rain; they 
send up fountains of mud from every passing wheel; they 
contrive that fires shall not burn nor water boil, that tea 
shall be lukewarm, bacon fat congealed, and warranted 
fresh eggs change in their very cups to mere eggs and 
dubious; they make the husband turn on the wife, the 
father on the child, and thus help to ruin all family life; and 
they lavishly sow all the ills that townsmen know, colds, 
indigestion, rheumatism, influenza, bronchitis, pneumonia, 
and are indeed the industrious hirelings of death. 

‘Got your umbrella? ' said Mrs. Smeeth. She had been 
out of bed over an hour, but somehow looked as if her real 
self was still there, as if this was a mysteriously wrapped 
wraith of herself she had projected downstairs. 1 Goo'-bye, 
then. You 'll have to run for it, dad.' 

Dad did not run for it, but he managed to trot down 
Chaucer Road and then along the neighbouring street, but 
after that he had a pain over his heart and was reduced to a 
sort of quick shamble. Before he reached the High Street 
and his tram, the bottom of his trousers were unpleasantly 
heavy, his boots (one of Mrs. Smeeth's bargains and made 
of cardboard) gave out a squelching sound, and the news- 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 67 

paper he carried was being rapidly reconverted into its 
original pulp. The tram , its windows steaming and stream- 
ing, was more crowded than usual, of course, and carried 
its maximum cargo of wet clothes, the wearers of which 
were simply so many irritable ghosts. After enormous 
difficulty, Mr. Smeeth succeeded in filling and lighting his 
morning pipe of T. Benenden's Own, and then — so stub- 
born is the spirit of man — succeeded in unfolding and 
examining his pulpy newspaper. Before he had reached 
the end of City Road, he had learned that the cost of a 
public school education was too high, that the night clubs 
on Broadway were not doing the business they had done, 
that a man in Birmingham had cut his wife's throat, that 
students in Cairo were again on strike, that an old woman in 
Hammersmith had died of starvation, that a policeman in 
Suffolk had found six pound notes in the prisoner's left sock, 
and that bubonic plague is conveyed to human beings by 
fleas from infected rats. And Angel Pavement, when he 
arrived there, looked as if it had been plucked, grey and 
dripping, from the bottom of an old cistern. 

It was an unpleasant morning at the office. To begin 
with, the situation was more puzzling than ever. Once 
more, Mr. Dersingham did not appear, but telephoned 
about half past ten to say that he would not be there until 
late afternoon and would Mr. Smeeth ‘just carry on/ 
Goath did not reappear, and Mr. Smeeth felt sure now 
that he had vanished for ever. Then Miss Matfield was 
haughtier than usual, and very cross. Young Turgis, who 
had contrived to get wetter than anybody else on his 
way up to the office, went slouching about with a long pale 
face, and every now and then startled and intimidated 
everybody by sneezing explosively. Stanley, at odds with 
the weather, the world, and his present destiny, hung about 
and got in people's way, and when told to get on with his 
work, pointed out, not very respectfully, that he hadn't 
any work, and Mr. Smeeth did not find it easy to supply 
him with any. Several inquiries by telephone could not 
be properly answered, always an unsatisfactory state of 
affairs. Mr. Smeeth had sufficient routine work to carry 
him through the morning, but he felt queerly insecure, 
not at all happy with his books, his neat little figures, his 
pencil, rubber, blue ink and red ink, now that he no longer 



68 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


knew what was happening to the firm. It was like trying, 
to post a ledger swinging above a dark gulf. 

Lunch time found him at his usual teashop, sitting at a 
wet marble-topped table and waiting for his poached egg 
on toast and cup of coffee. The wet morning had perished 
outside, where there was even a faint gleam of sunshine, but 
it had found a haven in this teashop, which seemed to be 
four hours behind the weather in the street, for it was 
all damp and steaming. Mr. Smeeth was jammed into a 
comer with another regular patron, a man with a glass eye, 
bright blue and with such a fixed glare about it that the 
thing frightened you. Mr. Smeeth was sitting on the same 
side as the glass eye, and as the owner of it, who was busy 
eating two portions of baked beans on toast and drinking 
a glass of cold milk, never turned his head as he talked, the 
effect was disconcerting and rather horrible. 

'Firm we’ve been doing business with/ said the man, 
disposing of a few beans that had quitted their toast, 'has 
come a nasty cropper — a ve-ery nasty cropper. Claridge 
and Molton—d’you know 'em? Oh, very nasty/ 

'Is that so?' said Mr. Smeeth politely, looking from his 
poached egg at the glaring blue eye and then looking away 
again. ‘Don’t think I know the firm/ 

‘No, well, you mightn’t/ the eye continued, as if it had 
its doubts about that, though. ‘ But they ’ve been a well- 
known house in the wholesale umbrella trade for donkeys’ 
years, specially for ribs, handles, and tips. I remember 
the time when they carried a line of ribs nobody else couldL 
touch — same with the tips. If you ’d come to us ten years 
ago, or five years ago, or even three years ago, and said, 
"We can offer you a line in ribs and tips that ’ll make 
Claridge and Molton look silly,” if you ’d said that, we 'd 
have laughed at you.’ 

'No doubt/ said Mr. Smeeth, quite seriously* 

'And up to eighteen months ago, I ’d have told you that 
Claridge and Molton was one of the soundest concerns in 
the business. And look at ’em now. Properly in Queer 
Street. Absolutely down the river.’ 

Mr. Smeeth manfully faced the blue glare* ‘How d’you 
account for it ? ’ he inquired, not out of mere politeness but 
because he really wanted to know. 

‘This mSk doesn’t taste right this morning/ his neigh- 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 69 

bour remarked mournfully. ‘They 've had it near some- 
thing. I'm giving it a miss. What was that?' And 
here the eye turned balefully. 'Oh, about Claridge and 
Molton. Well, young Molton 's the one that 's upset their 
little apple-cart. He took charge about a couple of years 
ago, then began staying away all day — likes his whisky, 
y' know — drew heavily on the firm — sacked their oldest 
man, old Johnny Fowler, for something and nothing. 
Probably tight at the time — young Molton, I mean, not 
Johnny Fowler — he never took a drop. And there you 
are! You can't do it, y' know, you can't do it. Can you? ' 
4 No/ said Mr. S neeth sadly, ‘you can't/ 

'Course you can't/ the eye concluded. 'Not nowadays. 
It 's all too keen, too much competition. You 've got to 
watch yourself all the time. Isn't that so? Eh, miss, 
miss ! My check, miss. And, I say, what abqut this milk ? ' 

Mr. Smeeth finished his coffee, mechanically filled and 
lit his pipe, then pushed his way out of the place. He felt 
miserable. For all he knew to the contrary^ Mr. Dersing- 
ham might be following the example of this young Molton. 
Hadn’t Mr. Dersingham just started staying away from the 
office all day? Hadn't he just sacked their oldest man, 
Goath? As he moved slowly along, sometimes staring 
into the windows of shops that meant nothing to him, Mr. 
Smeeth found himself going over all the possible ways in 
which a firm might come a nasty cropper, arrive at Queer 
Street, go down the river, and they seemed so numerous, 
so inevitable, that he saw himself joining the wretched 
army of the hangers-on, the dispossessed, at any moment. 
And, at the comer of Chiswell Street, he gave a man 
twopence for a box of matches. 

When he let himself quietly into the office, he heard 
loud voices, and thought for a moment that something 
exciting was happening. But then he caught the words. 

‘I shaddered him all down Victoria Park Road/ Stanley 
was saying triumphantly, 'and he never knew/ 

‘Well, why should he?' Turgis demanded, contemp- 
tuously. 1 He didn't know you were following him, you 
little chump/ 

‘I know he didn't,' cried Stanley. 'That 's it. That 's 

where shudderin' comes in ' 

4 Well, shadowing can come out/ Mr. Smeeth announced. 



70 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

'And if you don't fret on with some work, my boy, you 'll be 
finding yourself shadowing down those steps. Come on, 
Turgis, you ought to know a bit better. Standing there 
talking a lot of nonsense! ' 

'I was telling him it was nonsense,* said Turgis, rather 
sullenly. ‘ He *s got this shadowing on the brain. He 
goes following some chap for miles, and then because this 
chap doesn't take any notice of him — he doesn't know he 's 
there, of course, and doesn't care, anyhow — he thinks he's 
a little Sexton Blake.' 

'No, I don't,' said Stanley, wrinkling up his freckled face 
until it achieved a look of intense disgust. 

‘ The best thing you can do, Stanley,' said Mr. Smeeth, 
sitting down at his desk, ‘is to drop these silly tricks. 
They '11 get you into trouble one of these days. Why don't 
you do something sensible in your spare time? Get a 
hobby. Do a bit of fretwork or collect foreign stamps or 
butterflies or something like that.' 

'Huh! Nobody does them things now. Out of date,' 
Stanley muttered. 

'Well, work 's not out of date, not here, anyhow,' Mr. 
Smeeth retorted, in time-old schoolmaster fashion. 'So 
just get on with a bit.' 

Miss Matfield arrived, quarter of an hour late, as usual. 
‘Don't talk to me, anybody,' she commanded. 'I 'm 
furious. Of all the foul lunches I 've ever had in this city, 
to-day's was the foulest. It makes me sick to think about 
it. Look here, is Mr. Dersingham ever coming here again ? 
It 's absurd — I *ve got umpteen things for him to sign. 
Can you do anything with them, Mr. Smeeth? ’ 

' I '11 have a look at them, Miss Matfield,' said Mr. Smeeth 
wearily. 

The afternoon dragged on. 


rv 

At five o'clock, Mr. Dersingham arrived, bursting in like 
a large pink bomb. He was breathless, perspiring, and all 
smiles. 'Afternoon, ev'rybody,' he gasped. 'Is there a 
late spot of tea goin'? Doesn't matter if there isn't. I 
say, Miss Matfield, just drop ev'rything, will you, and 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 71 

bring your note-book to my room. I want to dictate some 
letters and a circular. Stanley, you get ready to copy the 
circular. And, Turgis, you ring up Brown and Gorstein 
and say I want to speak to Mr. Gorstein. And Smeeth, I 
shall want you when I 'm through with these letters, about 
a quarter of an hour's time, and will you bring that state- 
ment of the outstanding accounts right up to date and let 
me know all about Gorstein's and Nickman's payments 
this last year ? Good man ! ' 

Mr. Dersingham liked to signalize his arrival in this 
fashion — it looked as if he was starting the day for every- 
body, and it still looked like that even if he did it at five 
o'clock — but now there was a difference. His voice had a 
triumphant ring, in spite of the fact that he was short of 
breath. There was about his whole manner a Napoleonic 
abruptness and self-confidence. He presented the spec- 
tacle — rare enough too — of an Old Worrelian in big business. 
At one bound the temperature of the office rose about ten 
degrees, and Mr. Smeeth, as he investigated the firm's some- 
what melancholy relations with Brown and Gorstein and 
Nickman and Sons, was visited once more by quite wildly 
optimistic fancies. Undoubtedly, something had happened. 

When at last he was called into Mr. Derslngham’s room, 
he soon learned what it was that had happened. It was, 
as he had suspected more than once, this Mr. Golspie. 

‘And the position is this, Smeeth,' Mr. Dersingham con- 
tinued. ‘He 's got the sole agency for all this new Baltic 
stuff. They won't sell it to anybody here but Golspie. 
It 's good wood, all of it, quite up to standard, and he can 
get it at prices thirty, forty, and fifty per cent lower than 
we *ve been paying. I don't mind telling you that when 
he first explained what he was after, I wasn't keen at all, 
not a bit keen. It sounded fishy to me.' 

‘Does seem a bit queer he should come along like that, 
doesn't it, sir? ’ 

' It does, Smeeth, and that 's what I thought. But 
we 've been going round with some of his samples at prices 
we could sell the stuff at on his figures, and they 've been 
absolutely leaping at them. We can cut everybody out, 
absolutely clean out. We can do more business, Smeeth, 
with this new stuff in a fortnight than the firm 's ever done, 
even in its best days, in a month. And you know what 



72 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

business we 've been doing lately? Awful! A ghastly 
show! By the way, Smeeth, Goath was partly to blame 
for that* Oh, yes, he was. Thirty years in the trade and 
all that — but the fact is, they were all tired of seeing his 
depressing old mug, and he *d given up trying. Golspie 
soon showed me that, though I must say I 'd had my 
suspicions for some time.’ 

'So had I, sir.* 

‘ Exactly! Goath had to be booted out, and as it was he 
booted himself out. He 'll be feeling very sorry for himself 
soon. Now then, this is what 's happening. Golspie came 
along here to see me quite by chance. He 'd got this 
contract, but he wanted some firm already in the trade to 
join up with. All this is — er — in — y' know — between 
ourselves, Smeeth.' 

'I understand, sir/ said Mr. Smeeth, flattered and 
delighted. 

‘Golspie — Mr. Golspie — doesn't want a partnership, can't 
be bothered with it. He 's coming in here as a sort of 
general manager, working on a jolly good commission. 
You '11 have to know all about that, of course, because of 
the books. It 's a hefty commission all right, but then 
he 's bringing all the business really, and he '11 be respon- 
sible for getting the wood over and all that side of it. And 
the two of us will be working together, running things here. 
I '11 go out a good deal myself for the next few months, and 
we '11 have to get some fellow — somebody young and keen 
— to take Goath's place.' 

‘You won 't be cutting down the offipe staff, then? said 
Mr. Smeeth, greatly relieved. 

‘Cutting it down! We '11 have to jolly well increase it, 
and quickly too. That far sample room will have to be 
cleared out and tidied up this week, we shall want that. 
You 'd better get another typist to help Miss Matfield — a 
young girl will do — as soon as possible. This next week or 
two, Smeeth,' and here Mr. Dersingham sprang up and 
clenched his fists, just as if he had never seen a decent 
public school, ‘we 've got to drive it hard, go all out, and 
I 'm depending on you for the office side of it. You people 
have got to stand behind me in this. It 's a great chance 
for all of us, and, of course, a tremendous stroke of luck, 
Golspie's coming here. He 's going all out himself on this 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 73 

— he's that sort of chap, very keen and all that — and 
we 've got to keep pace.' 

'You can count on me doing my best, Mr. Dersingham,' 
Mr. Smeeth assured him fervently. ‘There's one or two 
things I 'd like to know about, of course. F'r'instance, 
what 's his arrangement with these foreign people of his 
about payments? ' 

‘He 's going to talk to you about that, Smeeth. We 've 
only just touched on that, so far.' 

‘And another thing, sir,' Mr. Smeeth continued, more 
hesitantly now. 'You know how we stand at the bank 
just now. If we 're branching out, we 've got to have 
something behind us there.' 

*1 've been looking into that this afternoon,' said Mr. 
Dersingham. ‘We can't do anything more with the bank 
at present, but I think I can borrow a bit to see us through. 
We 've got to have something to jolly well play with, 
this next month or so, particularly as Mr. Golspie talks 
about wanting some of his commission in advance, so to 
speak.' 

Mr. Smeeth looked grave, then coughed. *Do you think 
that would be wise, Mr. Dersingham? I mean — er — after 
all, you 've no guarantee ' 

'You mean — the whole thing may be just a swindle. 
Come on, isn't that it?' cried the other, grinning. ‘Well, 
of course I thought of that. I thought of God knows how 
many swindles yesterday morning, because, as I said, the 
whole thing seemed fishy to me, and, between ourselves, I 
thought Golspie himself a terrible outsider at first. But 
I 've gone into air that. He doesn't draw his commission 
until the stuff has been delivered to oui people, of course, 
but he wants his money then, without waiting until the 
account 's finally settled. Though, by the way, Smeeth, 
we 're not going to give these fellows so much rope in future. 
With this new stuff on our hands, we can afford to tighten 
it up a bit, don't you think ? ' 

'That 's so, Mr. Dersingham. I 'd like to see one or 
two of these accounts closed altogether. They're more 
bother than they 're worth.' Mr. Smeeth hesitated. ' I 'm 
not quite clear yet about this Mr. Golspie, sir. Is he going 
to be in charge of the office ? ’ 

'In a way, yes,' the other replied, with the air of a man 



74 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

who had given this question a great deal of thought. ‘You 
can take it, he is. Though of course it ’s still my show * 

‘Of course, Mr. Dersingham.' 

‘Suppose, by any chance, you disagree violently with 
anything he suggests, you ’ll come to me,* said Mr. Dersing- 
ham, looking at that moment like a large pink conspirator. 
‘But you needn’t tell that to the other people out there.' 

‘I see what you mean, sir,’ said Mr. Smceth, who felt 
that he would see in time. 

‘Mr. Golspie has a good deal to learn, of course,’ Mr. 
Dersingham continued, airily. ‘He doesn’t know the 
trade, and he doesn’t know the City. But — he seems to 
have knocked up and down all over the place in his time, 
and he ’s got ideas, y’ know, and colossal push. Rum sort 
of chap, I must say.’ Then he became business-like again. 
‘Now look here, Smeeth, I want to push off as soon as I can 
because I want that money — or some of it — into the bank 
by to-morrow afternoon. Ask Miss Matfield to hurry up 
with those letters so that I can sign ’em. And just see those 
circulars get away to-night, will you? ' 

‘ I will, Mr. Dersingham.’ And Mr. Smeeth turned away, 
but stopped before he reached the door. ‘ And if you don’t 
mind me saying so, sir, I 'm very pleased things are looking 
up like this. I was beginning to feel worried, very worried, 
sir.’ 

' Thanks, Smeeth 1 Good man ! ’ You could not mistake 
the Old Worrelian now. ‘Things will be humming here 
soon, you 'll see. Colossal luck, of course, his turning up 
like this! Oh, by the way, he ’s probably coming in soon.’ 

Mr. Golspie did come in, but only after Mr. Dersingham 
had gone and for about half an hour or so, during which he 
merely asked Mr. Smeeth a few questions. He came again 
the next morning, and Mr. Smeeth had to join him and 
Mr. Dersingham in a little conference. Mr. Golspie then 
returned about half past four, dictated some letters, nosed 
about the office, examined the far room, and did some 
telephoning at Mr. Dersingham’s table, Mr. Dersingham 
himself being out visiting Nickman and Sons. The others 
had gone, and Mr. Smeeth was putting away his books for 
the night, when Mr. Golspie came out of the private office 
and began asking more questions, chiefly about accounts. 
The two of them stayed there another twenty-five minutes. 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 75 

at the end of which Mr. Golspie suggested they should 
round off the proceedings by having a drink. 

When they were at the bottom of the stairs, Mr. Smeeth 
remembered that he was nearly out of tobacco (he smoked 
two and a half ounces of T. Benenden's Own Mixture every 
week) and said he would slip in for some. Mr. Golspie 
followed him in, and T. Beneden was so surprised to see this 
massive and large-moustached stranger again, in company 
with Mr. Smeeth this time, too, that he weighed out the 
tobacco and put it in the pouch without saying a word. 

‘You got any good cigars, good cigars? * Mr. Golspie de- 
manded in his resonant bass, at the same time staring hard, 
even harder than the tobacconist had stared at him. 

‘Certainly, I have/ replied T. Benenden with dignity. 
And he produced two or three boxes. 

Mr. Golspie chose two cigars, cut them, then popped one 
into his own mouth, stuck the other into Mr. Smeeth's and 
lit the pair of them, without a word. Then, alter blowing 
a stream of smoke at Benenden, he said: ‘How much? ' 

‘Three shillings, for the two/ 

Mr. Golspie slapped down two half-crowns on the counter. 
This was the tobacconist's opportunity. 

‘ What about this big cement slump, gentlemen ? ' he 
began. ‘Where 's that going to land us ?' 

‘It 's not going to land me anywhere/ said Mr. Golspie. 
‘ Where 's it going to land you ? ' 

T. Benenden looked rather pained, and still nursed the 
two shillings change in his hand. ‘Well, what I mean is 
this. That 's a big , combine, isn't it? A year ago, they 
were bang at the top, like nearly all the big combines. All 
right. But what's happening now? A slump. And 
why ?' 

‘I don't know, and I 'll bet you don't know/ said Mr. 
Golspie heartily. Then he gave a short bellow of a laugh. 
/Well, I '11 be damned,' he roared, ‘I 've been puzzling my 
head for the last five minutes wondering what was wrong 
with you.' 

‘ Me? ' T. Benenden was startled. 

'Yes, you. Didn't you notice I was staring at you?' 
He turned to Mr. Smeeth. ‘Couldn't make it out. I 
knew there was something wrong. You see it, don't you? ' 
He now returned to Benenden, at whom he pointed a thick 



76 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

brutal finger. ‘ Why, man, you 've forgotten to put your 
tie on. Have a look at yourself. I Rnew there was 
something. Is that my change? That's correct — two 
shillings.' 

Mr. Smeeth followed him out of the shop, gasping. He 
had been visiting Benenden's shop two or three times a 
week, year after year, and never once had he dared mention 
the word 'tie.' And now this chap comes along with his 
'You 've forgotten to put your tie on.' Mr. Smeeth began 
to chuckle softly. 

Mr. Golspie piloted him across the road and into the 
private bar of the White Horse. 

'Give it a name,' said Mr. Golspie. 

'Thanks, Mr. Golspie. Oh — er — just a glass of bitter,' 
said Mr. Smeeth modestly, from behind his large cigar. 

'Don't have a glass of bitter. Too cold a night like this 
and after a hard day’s work too. Have a whisky. That 's 
right. Two double whiskies and some soda.' 

It was quiet and cosy in the White Horse. Mr. Smeeth 
had not been in for a long time, and he was enjoying this. 
The fire winked cheerfully over the grate; the rows of 
liqueur bottles glimmered and glittered; the glasses shone 
softly; there was a pleasant hum of talk; the cigars plunged 
them at once into an atmosphere of rich, fragrant, luxurious 
conviviality; the whisky tasted good, and washed away 
that foggy, smoky, railway tunnel flavour of Angel Pave- 
ment ; and Mr. Golspie, still mysterious and masterful but 
genial now too, was obviously anxious they should be on 
friendly terms. 

'You've got a fellow working in the Midlands and 
the North, haven't you? ' Mr. Golspie inquired, after they 
had both taken a pull at their whiskies. ' What 's he like ? ' 

'Dobson? He 's a decent young chap, and he 's got a 
good connection up there. He 's not sold much lately but 
it 's not been for the want of trying.' 

‘We ought to be hearing from him soon, then,' said Mr. 
Golspie. 'It he can't sell these new veneers, he 'd better 
be walking. They sell themselves. We 've orders pouring 
in, just pouring. But, mind you, Smeeth, we 've got to 
get a move on. We 've got to pile up the orders now — 
make hay while the sun shines. We want another man for 
London and district, soon as we can get one. And one 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 77 

that 's alive, too, not like that dreary old devil I booted out 
the first day. You might as well send the dustbin round 
looking for orders. There ought to be three of us, me, 
Dersingham, and this other man, whoever he is, doing 
London and neighbourhood these next few months. Rush 
’em. That 's the way, isn’t it ? ’ 

Mr. Smeeth, taking out his cigar and trying to look keen 
and aggressive, said it was. 

*1 T1 tell you what I believe in/ Mr. Golspie continued, 
not troubling to lower his voice, or rather to moderate it, 
for it was low enough. 4 1 believe in working like hell and 
in playing like hell. If you ’re going to work, for God’s 
sake — work. And if you 're going to enjoy yourself, well, 
for the love of Mike, enjoy yourself, get on with it.’ 

At this point, Mr. Smeeth started back, for suddenly a 
head, a large head wearing a very dirty cap, but only about 
the height of his shoulder, stuck itself between him and Mr. 
Golspie. ’That's all very well, gents/ it $ai£L, with an 
impudent whine, ‘but what if yer can’t get work, 'ow yer 
goin’ ter enjoy yerself then, ch ? Wotcher goin' ter do 
then, eli?’ 

’There's one thing you can do/ said Mr. Golspie 
promptly. 

‘Wha’s that?' 

’You can mind your own bloody business,* said Mr. 
Golspie, pushing his face out in a most intimidating and 
disagreeable fashion. The intruder shrank back at once. 
’Here y' are,' Mr. Golspie said, in a milder, contemptuous 
tone, ‘ here 's threepence. Go away and buy yourself 
something/ 

‘Thank yer, mister.' And the head vanished. 

’This city’s got more and more rats like that in it every 
time I come back to it.’ 

’There isn't the work, you know,’ said Mr. Smeeth, 
earnestly. ’I don’t say they all want it, but there isn't 
the work. I 'll tell you candidly, Mr. Golspie, it frightens 
me sometimes to see all the chaps looking for work. If 
we 've to take on a few new people, and we advertise for 
them, you ’ll see what I mean. Crowds and crowds — 
ready to work for next to nothing. It 's a heart-breaking 
job interviewing them.' 

’I dare say/ Mr. Golspie replied, in the tone of a man 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


78 

whose heart is not easily broken. ‘But I know this. A 
man who 's ready to work for next to nothing is no good 
to me. I wouldn't have him as a gift. And that reminds 
me, Smeeth. What 's this firm paying you? * 

Mr. Smeeth hesitated a moment, then told him. 

‘ And do you think that 's enough ? * 

Mr. Smeeth hesitated again. ‘Well, if business was 
good, I was going to ask for a rise this Christmas, but, as 
you know, it 's not been good/ 

‘No, but it 's going to be good, don’t make any mistake 
about that/ cried Mr. Golspie. ‘It *s going to be a dam' 
sight better than Twigg and Dersingham have ever seen it 
before. Who the devil was Twigg? Never mind about 
him, though. I ’m going to tell you straight out, I don’t 
think you ’re getting enough. I know a good man when I 
see one, and when people stand by me — you know what I 
do? — that ’s right — I stand by them. And I ’m going to 
stand by you/ 

'Very good of you, Mr. Golspie,' muttered the embar- 
rassed Smeeth. 

‘The minute these orders that are coming now are turned 
into solid business — and, mind you, it means more work 
and responsibility for you all along the line — the minute 
they do, you ’re going to get a rise, a good rise, a hundred 
or two a year right off, or 1 ’in not Jimmy Golspie. And 
we shake hands on that.* 

Mr. Smeeth, overwhelmed, found himself shaking hands 
on it. 

‘And now/ Mr. Golspie added masterfully, ‘we’ll just 
sign and seal that by having a little quick one/ 

‘All right. But — er — it 's my turn.' 

'Not a bit of it. Not to-night. You haven't a turn to- 
night. Wait till the big rise comes. Two singles, please. 
Married man, aren't you, Smeeth? ’ 

' I am. Wife and two children, boy just out of his teens 
and girl nearly eighteen.' 

‘ All I * ve got 's a girl. I 'm expecting her over soon. 
Does this girl of yours take much notice of you? ' 

‘Not much. Seems to me they don't, nowadays/ 
‘You're right there. That girl of mine doesn't — the 
wilful, artful little devil. She 's been spoilt all her life, 
and always will be. Too good-lookin', that 's her trouble. 



MR. SMEETH IS REASSURED 79 

Doesn’t take after her father, y’know,’ and here Mr. 
Golspie disturbed the whole bar with a sudden deep guffaw. 
‘Well, here’s the best! This is a dam' rum business, 
y’ know, Smeeth, when you come to think of it. I 've had 
a finger in all sorts of trades, all over the place, and this is a 
bit more respectable than some of ’em. But when you 
think of it— it ’s a dam’ rum trade— selling thin bits of 
wood to glue on to other bits of wood, eh? ’ 

'I 've often thought that,' said Mr. Smeeth eagerly, the 
philosopher waking in him too. ' I ’ve often thought— well, 
I dunno — but this trade’s like a good deal of the rest of life. 
Veneers? Well, Mr. Golspie, just think of them. They 're 
only there to make a piece of furniture look as if it was 
made of better wood than it is made of, a sort of fake. But 
everybody knows about it. There 's no deception. And 
I 've often thought a lot of life ’s like that, particularly 
when I 've gone into company. You know, everybody 
setting up to be mahogany and walnut through and 
through ’ 

’And the lot of ’em veneered to hell,' cried Mr. Golspie 
jovially. 'Never mind, let 's see if we can't slap all our 
stuff on to their rotten chairs and wardrobes and sideboards, 
and make money and enjoy ourselves. That 's the game.’ 

With that, they swung out into the little night of Angel 
Pavement, where the diapason of Mr. Golspie could be heard 
thundering out again that it was the game. With rich 
Havana still in his nostrils, the golden liquor of the glens 
wandering round his inside like an enchanted Gulf Stream, 
and Mr. Golspie’s promises singing their madrigals in his 
head, Mr. Smeeth felt for once that it really might be all 
a game. 

Waiting for his tram that night, he bought two evening 
papers instead of one, and read neither of them. 



CHAPTER III 


THE DERSINGIIAMS AT HOME 
I 

Bv the middle of the following week, there were severa 
changes at Twigg and Dersingham’s. The greatest change 
was in the atmosphere of the place. Even if you had 
merely opened the outer door, remaining on that side of 
the frosted glass partition, you would have felt the difference 
at once. No doubt the typewriters rattled and pinged., the 
telephone bell rang, voices came through, all in a new 
and bustling, optimistic fashion. The very chair you were 
invited to sit on, when you waited behind that partition, 
had been dusted. Mrs. Cross had not found herself im- 
mune from this new influence: she had given the general 
office a thorough cleaning. There was no question now of 
anybody not having enough work to do. Stanley still went 
out, indeed he went out more than ever, but he was com- 
pelled to speed up his ' shaddering ’ methods and was only 
able to follow men who were in a tremendous hurry. Mr. 
Smeeth among his little .figures was as busy and happy as 
a monk at his manuscript. Turgis, whose duty it was to 
see that goods were duly forwarded to and from Twigg and 
Dersingham’s, became both hoarse and haughty down the 
telephone to all manner of forwarding agents, and spoke to 
railway goods clerks as if they were strange and unwelcome 
dogs. Miss Matfield rattled off her letters with slightly 
less contempt and disgust, rather as if they were no longer 
the effusions of complete lunatics but were now merely the 
work of village idiots. And she had acquired an assistant. 
The staff of Twigg and Dersingham had been enlarged at 
the beginning of this week by the appointment of a second 
typist. Miss Poppy Sellers had arrived. 

. The girls who earn their keep by going to offices and 
working typewriters may be divided into three classes. 
There are those who, like Miss Matfield, are the daughters 
of professional gentlemen and so condescend to the office 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 81 

and the typewriter, who work beneath them just as girls 
once married beneath them. There are those who take it 
all simply and calmly, because they are in the office tra- 
dition, as Mr. Smeeth's daughter would have been. Then 
there are those who rise to the office and the typewriter, 
who may not make any more money than their sisters and 
cousins who work in factories and cheap shops — they may 
easily make considerably less money — but nevertheless are 
able to cut superior and ladylike figures in their respective 
family circles because they have succeeded in becoming 
typists. Poppy belonged to this third class. Her father 
worked on the Underground, and he and his family of four 
occupied half a house not far from Eel Brook Common, 
Fulham, that south-western wilderness of vanishing 
mortar and bricks that are coming down .in the world. 
This was not Poppy's first job, for she was tweijty and had 
been steadily improving herself in the commercial world 
since she was fifteen, but it was easily her most important 
one. She had been chosen out of a large number of appli- 
cants, had been started at two pounds and te4 shillings a 
week, and had been told confidentially by Mr. Smeeth, who 
seemed to her a terrifying figure, that she had good pros- 
pects if she would only learn and work hard. This Poppy 
fully intended to do, for-— as her testimonials were com- 
pelled to admit — she was a very industrious and conscien- 
tious girl. She was not sufficiently plain to escape entirely 
the attentions of the youths who hung about the entrance 
to the Red Hall Cinema in Walham Green (and Poppy 
frequently visited the Red Hall with her friend, Dora 
Black, for she liked entertainment), but nobody yet had 
said that she was pretty. She was small and slight, had 
dark hair and brown eyes, and she aimed, rather timidly, at 
a Japanese or Javanese or general Oriental effect, wearing 
a fringe and all that, but only succeeded in looking vaguely 
dingy and untidy. Whenever she despairingly made a 
special effort, plying hard the lipstick, being lavish with, 
the Oriental-effect face-powder, and raising and keeping 
her eyebrows so high that it hurt, people asked her if she 
wasn't feeling very well. This failure to achieve the exotic 
beauty that was — as both she and Dora Black believed — 
‘her type,' tended to keep poor Poppy slightly depressed 
and out of love with herself. During her first few days at. 



82 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

Twigg and Dersingham 's, she was like a mouse. She was 
overawed by the newness and importance of everything, 
and she saw that it would be impossible for her to make 
a friend of the large, superior, infinitely knowledgeable, 
tremendously condescending Miss Matfield. But, like a 
mouse, she kept her eyes open, missing nothing, with her 
busy little Cockney mind fastening on every crumb of in- 
formation and gossip. After three days, Miss Dora Black, 
of Basuto Road, Fuiham, knew more, though at second 
hand, about the office staff of Twigg and Dersingham than 
Mr. Dersingham himself had learned in three years. 

One of Miss Poppy Sellers's first tasks had been to copy 
•out replies to the letters answering Twigg and Dersing- 
ham's advertisement in The Times and the Daily Telegraph. 
This was for another man, to take Goath’s place, though he 
would have to spend much of his time further afield. He 
had to be as unlike Goath as possible in character, but not 
unlike him in experience. In short, he had to be ‘young, 
keen, energetic,' and ‘with some connection in furnishing 
trade and knowledge of veneers and inlays.' And the 
change brought about by Mr. Golspie was such that Twigg 
and Dersingham were able to declare that for the right man 
there was ‘a good opening.' 

It has been said that the modern English do not like 
work. It cannot be said that they do not look for it and 
ask for it. The day after this advertisement appeared, 
the postal heavens opened and a hurricane of letters fell 
upon Twigg and Dersingham. Into Angel Pavement all 
that day there poured a bewildering stream of replies. It 
seemed as if street after street, whole suburbs, had been 
waiting for this particular opening. There were, it ap- 
peared, dozens of men with vast connections in the furnish- 
ing trade and the most thorough, the most intimate 
knowledge of veneers and inlays, and most of these men, 
though they had apparently refused scores of offers 
recently, were only too willing to assist Messrs. Twigg and 
Dersingham. Then there were men who had not perhaps 
exactly a connection but had been for years, so to speak, 
on the fringe of the furnishing trade, men who had sold 
pianos, who had given removing estimates, who had done 
a little valuing, who knew something about upholstering. 
Then there were older men, ex-officers many of them, who 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 83 

knew about all kinds of things and were ready to enclose 
the most astonishing testimonials, who admitted that the 
furnishing trade and veneers and inlays were all new to 
them but who felt that they could soon learn all there was 
to know, and in the meantime were anxious to show how 
they could command men and to display their unusual 
ability to organize. And, last of all, there were the public 
school men, fellows who knew nothing about veneers and 
inlays and did not even pretend to care about them, but 
pointed out that they could drive cars, manage an estate, 
organize anything or anybody, and were willing to go out 
East, being evidently under the impression that Twigg and 
Dersingham had probably a couple of tea plantations as 
well as a business in veneers and inlays. These corre- 
spondents expressed themselves in every imaginable sort of 
handwriting and on every conceivable kind of notepaper, 
from superior parchment to dirty little pink bits that had 
been saved up in a box on the mantelpieci, but in one 
particular they were all alike: they were all keen, all 
energetic. 1 

'This tells you something about the old country, doesn't 
it? * said Mr. Golspie, who always talked as if he came from 
some newer one. He and Mr. Dersingham and Mr. Smeeth 
had been going through the pile. 

'It's only the slump,' said Mr. Dersingham, who was 
feeling optimistic these days. ‘It 's not so bad as it was, 
is it, Smeeth? ' 

'I suppose it isn't, really, Mr. Dersingham.* But Mr. 
Smeeth sounded rather doubtful. These letters had given 
him another glimpse of the dark gulf. It was a sight that 
left him feeling shaky. 

Mr. Golspie grunted. 1 Far as I can see from this lot, you 
can have the pick of England's talent for four or five quid 
a week. There isn't a dam* thing these fellows can't do — 
except find work. Well, I 've got about four likely ones 
here. What have you chaps got ? * 

After a good deal more trouble and talk, they finally 
narrowed the possible applications down to ten, and these 
ten were asked to appear at the office in the early afternoon, 
two days later. Ihey all came at once, and so had to wait 
their turn on the landing outside, while Stanley, enjoying 
himself hugely, dashed in and out to summon them 
D93» 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


84 

Mr. Smeeth, going round to the bank, had to make his way 
through this little crowd, and at the first moment, when he 
stepped outside the office and the two or three of them 
nearest the door made way for him with almost ostenta- 
tious smartness, he felt triumphant, proud, a solid and 
successful man among a lot of failures. But the very next 
moment, this feeling disappeared. They were all very 
well brushed, in their best clothes, and were already looking 
keen and energetic, especially those nearest the door, who 
looked the keenest and most energetic, their faces having 
already taken on the expression most likely to impress the 
mysterious powers within the office. A few of them were 
young and had an easy confident look, that of men merely 
seeking a change of job. Others were older, less confident, 
tense or wistful. Mr. Smeeth bumped into one, the last 
in the group, who was standing at the corner near the top 
of the stairs. 

‘I beg your pardon/ the man cried, eagerly, anxiously. 
He was indeed an anxious man, about Mr. Smeeth ’s age 
and not unlike him, greyish, lined, brittle; a man with a 
wife and family and vanishing possessions; a man who time 
after time had found himself the last in the group, waiting 
at the comer, with the hope inspired by the letter, the 
letter that came thunderingly, triumphantly, that morning, 
like an act of deliverance, now dying in him. 

‘My fault/ Mr. Smeeth assured him, stopping, and 
offering the smile of a polite culprit. But when their eyes 
met fairly, this smile trembled, then fled, leaving Mr. 
Smeeth himself grave, anxious. He suddenly felt for this 
man a swelling sympathy, a deep stir of pity, that he had 
not known for many a month. They might have been 
brothers; and, indeed, brothers they were for a second or 
so, peering at one another in some darkened house of 
tragedy. 

‘Good luck!* Mr. Smeeth heard himself saying. 

‘Thanks/ and there came the ghost of a smile. 

Mr. Smeeth never saw him again. He had no luck. 
The successful applicant was very different, much younger, 
a tall fellow with a remarkably small head, an inquisitive 
pink nose, and a very wide mouth that opened to show 
about twice the ordinary number of teeth. His name was 
Sandycroft, and he knew the trade, for though he had 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 85 

never sold veneers and inlays, he had bought them, 
having been at one time with Briggs Brothers. This set 
him apart from all the other applicants. Moreover, he 
appealed to be all keenness and energy, and threw the most 
passionate emphasis into the slightest remark he made. 

‘Mr. Twigg,' he cried, addressing Mr. Golspie, 'and Mr. 
Dersingham, you can rely on me. I know the trade. I 
know the people. I know the ropes, if you don't mind me 
saying so.' 

‘All right,' said Mr. Golspie, with his usual genial 
brutality. ‘But don’t go knowing too many ropes. Eh, 
Dersingham? ' 

‘Oh, quite!' replied Mr. Dersingham, who did not quite 
follow this, but looked knowing all the same. 

' I understand, sir. I know what you mean. I couldn't 
do it, sir. It 's not in my character. Honesty isn't every- 
thing, but I believe it ’s the first thing. And I 'm straight. 
1 believe in being straight, sir.' r 

4 Good! ' said Mr. Golspie heartily, for he, too, believed in 
Sandycroft and his like being straight. 

‘And if it ’s possible, gentlemen, ’ Sandycroft continued, 
looking from one to the other of them, ‘ I 'd like to stay on 
now and just pick up the threads, so that 1 can start right 
away on the road to-morrow morning. I 'm keen to get 
going, desperately keen. You know what it is, sir. After 
only a week or two doing nothing much, a man like me 
feels rusty. I want to get on with it. My wife laughs at 
me. “Have a rest," she says. But no, I 'm not like that. 
I must be getting on with something/ 

‘Good man,' said Mr. Dersingham approvingly. 

‘Well, I think we '11 have to be getting on with something 
too,' said Mr. Golspie. ‘He 'd better come round here in 
the morning and learn what there is to know about it then, 
before we send him out.' 

‘I think he had,' replied Mr. Dersingham. 'Look here, 
you 'd better go home now — break the news to your wife 
and that sort of thing, eh? — and then be down about nine 
or so in the morning. If we 're not here then, you have a 
talk to Smeeth — that 's the cashier, out there — and he '11 
be able to tell you something.' 

'Very good, sir,' and you would have thought the speaker 
was about to salute smartly before retiring. He did not 



86 4NGEL PAVEMENT 

however; but threw a keen and energetic glance at Mr. 
Golspie (whom he had recognized at once as the dominant 
partner), then a keen and energetic glance at Mr. Dersing- 
ham, picked up his hat (and in such a manner as to suggest 
that he could do some wonderful things even with that, if 
he wished to), brought his hat in front of the second 
button of his overcoat, gave three brisk nods, then wheeled 
about and made an exit like a torpedo from its tube. 

Acutally, what Mr. Dersingham and Mr. Golspie did get 
on with was an invitation to dinner, delivered by Mr. 
Dersingham and accepted by Mr. Golspie. It had come to 
that. There were things about Golspie that did not please 
Mr. Dersingham, for he was dogmatic, rough, domineering, 
and was apt to jeer and sneer in a way that left Mr. Dersing- 
ham's mind bruised and resentful. A few terms at Worrell 
would obviously have made a great difference to Golspie, 
who now, in his middle age, showed only too plainly both 
by word and deed that he was not a gentleman. From 
that there was no escape: Golspie was not a gentleman. 
But Dersingham did not think of him as an Englishman 
who is not a gentleman, a bit of a bounder, an outsider (and 
there can be no doubt that Golspie at times did talk and 
act like a bounder, a complete outsider) ; he contrived to 
think of him as a kind of foreigner who had acquired an 
extraordinary command of the English language. This 
was not difficult, because Golspie did seem to have spent 
most of his time outside England and to have no roots in 
this country. And the fact remained that he had presented 
the firm of Twigg and Dersingham with a new and glorious 
lease of life, as if he were a god, a commercial god with a 
baldish head and a large moustache. So the Dersinghams 
had talked it over and decided that he must be asked to 
dinner, properly asked to dinner and not merely invited to 
take pot-luck some Sunday. And this meant something, 
for though your Old Worrelian who has to hack out his 
living in the city will smoke a cigar and drink a whisky or 
share a couple of club chops, if necessary, with any fairly 
decent sort of fellow he meets in the way of business, he 
draws the line — his own words — at inviting most of these 
fellows into his home, to meet his wife and possibly another 
Old Worrelian or two. Thus it says something for Mr. 
Golspie's standing that, in spite of certain pronounced 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 87 

defects, he received such an invitation, which, by the way, 
he accepted calmly enough, with no show of surprise or 
gratitude. 

'There'll be some other people I think you'd like to 
know,' said Mr. Dersingham, 'but we won't make it too 
formal. Just a black tie, y' know, black tie.' He said this 
as people always say it, that is, as if a white tie weighed a 
ton and they are letting you down lightly. 

'What do you mean? Wear a dinner jacket?' 

'That 's the idea,' said Mr. Dersingham, telling himself 
that really Golspie was extraordinarily out of touch. ‘ And 
— er — eightish then, next Tuesday, eh? ' 

‘Right you are,' replied Mr. Golspie. ‘Very pleased.' 


n 

The Dersinghams occupied a lower maisonette in that 
region, eminently respectable but a trifle dreary, between 
Gloucester Road and Earl's Court Road: 34A, Barkfield 
Gardens, S.W.5. Nearly all the people wtw> live in that 
part of London have the privilege, as the estate agents 
point out in all their advertisements, Of 'overlooking 
gardens,' which means that their windows stare down at 
iron railings, sooty privet and laurel hedges, and lawns and 
flower-beds that look as if they are only too willing to give 
up the unequal struggle. Some of these gardens are better 
than others, but Barkfield Gardens is not one of them. It 
is one of the smallest and dreariest of the squares, and is 
rapidly losing caste, its houses slipping through the maison- 
ette and large flat era too quickly and already coming 
within sight of the small flats, the nursing homes, the 
boarding houses, the girls' clubs. The Dersinghams did . 
not like Barkfield Gardens. They did not like their 
maisonette, all the rooms of which seemed higher than they 
were long or broad and were singularly cheerless. Mr. 
Dersingham never did anything about it, because he was 
waiting — as he always said — until he knew where he stood 
financially. (From which you might gather that he knew 
where he stood philosophically or socially or politically or 
artistically.) Now and again, however, Mrs. Dersingham 
would read all the advertisement columns devoted to 



88 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

desirable residences, rush round to some agents, and even 
inspect a few houses, but as she had never really decided 
what it was she wanted, and her husband never succeeded 
in knowing where he stood financially, they remained at 
34A, in the rooms that made them seem like insects at the 
bottom of a test-tube, grumbling, while a stream of cooks 
and housemaids, endlessly diverted from four local regis- 
tries, flowed through the dark basement, leaving as sedi- 
ment innumerable memories of glum looks, impertinent 
answers, lying references, missing silk stockings, broken 
crockery, and ruined meals. For some women this state of 
affairs, making comfort and tranquillity impossible, would 
have had its compensations, for it would have provided 
unlimited material for talk, but Mrs. Dersingham prided 
herself on not being the sort of woman who spends her 
time discussing the shortcomings of her servants. Most of 
her friends prided themselves on this fact too, and they told 
one another what they could have said had they been that 
sort of women, and then gave examples. ‘I know, but 
listen to this, my dear/ they all cried at once. 

At seven-forty-five on the evening of the dinner party to 
which Mr. Golspie had been invited, Mr. Dersingham was 
busy being his own butler, attending to the wines. He 
poured some claret into one decanter, some Sauterne into 
another, and some port into a third, then poured a little 
gin and a great deal of French and Italian vermouth into 
a cocktail shaker, and carried the shaker and some glasses 
into the drawing-room. Having done this, he remembered 
the cigarettes and filled the silver cigarette box, a wedding 
present bearing the Worrell colours in enamel, with Sahibs 
and some Turkish that his wife always said she preferred 
to any other, no matter what they happened to be. Then 
he presented himself with a cocktail, looked at the fire, 
which was blazing cheerfully, looked at the chairs, which 
were long, low, fat, and brown, glanced round the room, 
which seemed to him a very handsome and friendly place 
now that the two shaded lights took away the attention 
from the great bleak expanse of wall above, sipped the 
cocktail, tried to hum a tune, and begin to feel a certain 
warm glow, a feeling proper to a host. 

Mrs. Dersingham, who was in the bedroom, trying to 
powder the space between her shoulder-blades, was less 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 89 

fortunate. She felt anxious. Cook had been rather cross 
all day and might spoil everything, and even when she 
tried, she was apt to make the soup greasy and forget the 
salt in the vegetables. And Agnes, the new maid, had 
pretended to understand all about serving, but she was so 
stupid that she might easily go sticking vegetable dishes 
under people's noses anyhow, and there was bound to be 
some awful confusion when it came to clearing the table 
for dessert. You could laugh it off, of course, but you got 
so tired of laughing it off. It was a pity this sort of thing 
couldn't be done properly or laughed off altogether. How 
terribly tiresome it was! And then, too, all the time 
you were so worried and anxious about the food and the 
serving, you were expected to be keeping the conversation 
going, terribly bright and hostessy. 

' I wish/ said a silly girl at the back of Mrs. Dersingham's 
mind, a girl who had always been there but who did not 
say much except when she was rather tired o* cross, * I wish 
I was a terribly successful actress who lived in a marvellous 
little fiat and had a terribly devoted maid and a dresser and 
a huge car and nothing much to eat before the performance 
and then went on and was absolutely marvellous and every- 
body applauded and then I put on a wonderful Russian 
sable coat and diamonds and went out to supper and every- 
body stared. No, I don't. I wish I was a terribly success- 
ful woman writer with a villa somewhere on the Riviera 
with orange trees and mimosa and things and lunch in the 
sunshine and marvellous distinguished people coming to 
call. No, I don't. I wish I was terribly rich with a house- 
keeper and about fifteen servants and a marvellous maid of 
my own and umpteen Paris model gowns every season and 
a house in Town and a place in the country and a very 
attractive dark young man, very aristocratic and a racing 
motorist or yachtsman or something like that, terribly in 
love with me but just devoted and respectful all the time 
and coming and looking so miserable and me saying, ' I 'm 
sorry, my dear, but you can see how it is. I can never 
love anybody but Howard, but we can still be friends, 
can't we?"' 

This silly girl still went rambling idiotically on while 
there returned into the rest of Mrs. Dersingham's mind 
various queries and worries about the sauce for the fish 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


90 

and the cr£me caramel not setting properly and Agnes 
spilling things. And all the time she was powdering her 
back or neck, trying on the crystal beads and then the 
amber, rubbing her cheeks with a tiny reddened pad, and 
staring at her reflection in the Jacobean mirror that she had 
bought at Brighton and that turned out to be a poor mirror 
and not Jacobean at all. The one consolation was that 
you always knew that you actually looked better than 
you did in that stupid mirror. Remembering this for the 
thousandth time, Mrs. Dersingham switched off the light, 
stood outside the night nursery a moment to discover if the 
children were quiet, then joined her husband in the drawing- 
room. 

'Oh, thank goodness, nobody's here yet/ she said, 
pulling a cushion or two about, then warming her hands. 
* It 's such a ghastly rush. It 's wonderful to have a few 
minutes' peace and quietness.' She was already talking 
as if company were present. 

'Rather,' said Mr. Dersingham, loyally. 

She stood in front of him now. 'I suppose I look a 
thorough mess/ she continued, with a relapse into her 
natural manner. 

'Not a bit. Jolly fine,' Mr. Dersingham mumbled, 
feeling awkward as usual. He always had a suspicion 
that he ought to have said something first: ‘My word, 
you 're looking jolly fine to-night,' something of that sort. 
But somehow he never did. 

'Don't be too complimentary, will you, darling? Well, 
I must say I fed a thorough mess to-night. What I 'd 
really like is early bed and a book. This rush and seeing 
people all the time is so terrible.' Once more, she was 
beginning to put on her company manner. 

Mrs. Dersingham did not look a thorough mess, but 
neither did she look as attractive as she hoped she did. 
She looked like hundreds of other English wives in their 
earlier thirties, that is, fair, tired, bright, and sagging. 
She had pleasant blue eyes, a tumed-up nose, and a slightly 
discontented mouth. Her life, apart from the secret saga 
of the kitchen and the nursery, where creatures with the 
most astoundingly good references were for ever turning out 
to be lazy, impudent, and thieving, was really rather dull, 
for she had no strong interests and very few friends in 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 91 

London. But this she would not admit, not even to her 
husband, except on rare occasions when she lost her temper, 
broke down, and the truth came blazing through. She 
pretended that her life was one exciting and multi-coloured 
whirl of people and social events. She did not actually tell 
lies, but she created an atmosphere in which every little 
occurrence was instantly distorted and magnified, like 
objects dropped into a glass tank full of water. A tea on 
Monday and a dinner party on Friday were transformed 
into a week's feasting, a rushing here, there, and every- 
where, not enjoyed but endured. If she met a person two 
or three times, then she had met whole crowds of him or 
her, day and night. Two matinees (with an old school 
friend or her mother up from Worcester) coming within one 
week reduced her to the condition of a dramatic critic at 
the end of a heavy autumn season. Even when she ad- 
mitted that she had not attended a certain; function, met 
a person, seen a play, read a book, she contrived to give 
these confessions a positive instead of a negative flavour, 
and so strong a positive flavour that somehow she seemed 
to be in close contact with the function, person, play, or 
book. She did this partly by throwing t}ie emphasis on 
the auxiliary verb: 'No, I haven* t see her,' or: ‘No, I 
haven't see it,' which suggested to the listener that Mrs. 
Dersingham had attended a series of important committee 
meetings, had thrashed it out, and had decided with the 
rest that there should be nothing done about these people, 
these plays, these books, just yet. Thus, by this and other 
methods, she created an atmosphere in which a few outings 
and encounters were transformed into a rich and strenuous 
social life, which, so strong are our dreams, frequently left 
her genuinely fatigued. All this puzzled that simple man, 
her husband, but he never said anything now. The last 
time he had asked, after the company had gone, why she 
had complained so much about having to rush about, when 
he, for his part, could not see she had done much rushing 
about, she had turned on him quite fiercely and said that 
if it depended on him she would be sitting moping in the 
flat, never seeing anybody or anything, from one week's 
end to another, and that the less he said the better; an 
answer that left him completely bewildered. 

The Dersinghams, standing together now on their bear- 
*D 93* 



92 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

skin rug, heard the first guest arrive. It must be either 
Golspie or the Trapes. It could not be the Pearsons, who, 
living in the maisonette above, always waited until they 
heard someone else arrive below, before they made their 
appearance. And Golspie it was, looking strangely un- 
familiar to Mr. Dersingham in a rather voluminous dinner 
jacket and a very narrow black tie. He had hardly been 
introduced to Mrs. Dersingham before the Pearsons, who 
were just as anxious not to be late as they were not to be 
first, came in, breathless and smiling. 

'A-ha, good evening!' cried Mr. Pearson, as if he had 
found them out. 

'And how are you, my dear?' cried Mrs. Pearson to 
her hostess, in such a tone of voice that nobody would 
have imagined that they had met less than four hours 
ago. 

The Pearsons were a middle-aged, childless couple, who 
had recently retired from Singapore. Mr. Pearson was a 
tallish man, with a long thin neck on which was perched a 
pear-shaped head. His cheeks were absurdly plump, a 
sharp contrast to all the rest of him, so that he always 
appeared to have just blown them out. He was both 
nervous and amiable, and consequently he laughed a great 
deal at nothing in particular, and the sound he made when 
he laughed can only be set down as Tee-tee-tee-tee-tee . Mrs. 
Pearson, who was altogether plump, had her face framed in 
a number of mysterious dark curls, and looked vaguely like 
one of the musical comedy actresses of the picture post card 
era, one who had perhaps retired, after queening it in The 
Catch of the Season, to keep a jolly boarding-house. They 
were a lonety, friendly pair, who obviously did not know 
what on earth to do to pass the time, so that this was for 
them an occasion of some importance, to be looked forward 
to, to be referred to, to be enjoyed to the last syllable of 
small talk. 

They were now all shouting at one another, after the 
fashion of hosts and guests in Barkfield Gardens and 
elsewhere. 

'Found your way here all right then?' Mr. Dersingham 
bellowed to Mr. Golspie. 

'Came in a taxi/ Mr. Golspie boomed over his cocktail. 

'That 's the best way if you 're going to a strange house 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 93 

in London, isn't it?' Mr. Pearson shouted. 'We always 
do it when we can afford it. Tee-tee-tee-tee-tee.’ 

'And how's the little darling to-night?' Mrs. Pearson 
inquired at the top of her voice, affectionately maternal as 
usual. 

'Oh, we took the infant’s temperature, and it was 
normal. He 's all right,’ Mrs. Dersingham screamed in 
reply, elaborately unmaternal as usual. 

' I ’m so glad, so glad.’ And as she said it, Mrs. Pearson 
looked all beaming and moist. ‘I was so afraid there 
might be something really wrong with the dear kiddy. I 
was telling Walter that you thought it might be a chill. 
I 'm so glad it wasn't, my dear. You can't be too careful 
with them — can you ? ’ 

'This Russian business looks pretty queer, doesn't it?' 
Mr. Dersingham shouted. 

'Very queer. What do you make of it?' Mr. Pearson 
shouted in reply. He made nothing of it himself yet, 
because the evening paper had not told him what to make 
of it and he had heard nobody’s opinion yet. On any 
question that had its origin west of Suez, Mr. Pearson liked 
to agree with his company. When it was east of Suez, he 
sometimes took a line of his own, and When Singapore 
itself was actually involved, he had been known to contra- 
dict people. 

‘Well, I '11 tell you, Dersingham,' said Mr. Golspie, who 
as usual knew his own mind. 'It 's all a lot of tripe, bosh, 
bunkum. I know those yams. Fellows up in Riga trying 
to earn their money, they sent out that stuff.’ 

'That 's terribly interesting, Mr. Golspie,' Mrs. Dersing- 
ham shrieked at him, suddenly looking like a woman of the 
world who had wanted to get to the bottom of this business for 
some time. ‘ Of course, you 've been up there, haven't you ? ' 

'Round about.' And Mr. Golspie gave her a grin, at 
once sardonic and friendly. It seemed to tell her that she 
was all right, not a bad-looking girl, but she mustn’t try to 
draw him, for that wasn’t her line at all, not at all. 

' It makes a difference when you 've been there, doesn't 
it?’ cried Mr. Pearson. 'You know the facts. Tee-tee- 
tee-tee-tee.’ 

‘And where do you live now, Mr. Golspie? ’ Mrs. Pearson 
inquired, rather archly and with her head on one side. 



94 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

'Just got a furnished flat in Maida Vale/ replied Mr. 
Golspie. 

'Now I don't think I know that part/ Mrs. Pearson said, 
girlishly reflective. 

'There 's a lot of London we still don't know. Tee-tee- 
tee-tee-tee.' 

'You 're not missing much if you don't know Maida Vale, 
from what I 've seen of it,' Mr. Golspie boomed away. 
'Where I live seems to be full of Jews and music-hall turns. 
Old music-hall turns, not the good-lookin' young 'uns.' 

‘Tee-tee-tee/ Mr. Pearson put in, rather doubtfully. 

‘Oh, you men!' cried Mrs. Pearson, who had not lived 
at Singapore for nothing : she knew her cues. 

'Tee-tee.' Triumphant this time. 

Miss Verever was announced, and very resentfully, for 
already Agnes had had enough of the evening and she had 
not liked the way this particular guest had walked in and 
looked at her. 

There is something to be said for Agnes. Miss Verever 
was one of those people who, at a first meeting, demand 
to be disliked. She was Mrs. Dersingham's mother's 
cousin, a tall, cadaverous virgin of forty-five or so, who 
displayed, especially in evening clothes, an uncomfortable 
amount of sharp gleaming bone, just as if the upper part of 
her was a relief map done in ivory. In order that she 
might not be overlooked in company and also to protect 
herself, she had developed and brought very near to per- 
fection a curiously disturbing manner, which conveyed a 
boundless suggestion of the malicious, the mocking, the 
sarcastic, the sardonic, the ironical. What she actually 
said was harmless enough, but her tone of voice, her ex- 
pression, her smile, her glance, all these suggested that her 
words had some devilish inner meaning. In scores of small 
hotels and pensions overlooking the Mediterranean, merely 
by asking what time the post went or inquiring if it had 
rained during the night, she had made men wonder if they 
had not shaved properly and women ask themselves if 
something had gone wrong with their complexions, and 
compelled members of both sexes to consider if they had 
just said something very silly. After that, she had only to 
perform the smallest decent action for people to say that 
she had a surprisingly kind heart as well as a terrifying 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 95 

clever satirical head. This was all very well if people had 
booked rooms under the same roof for the next three 
months, but on chance acquaintances, wondering in- 
dignantly what on earth she had against them , this peculiar 
manner of hers had an unfortunate effect. 

She now advanced, kissed her hostess, shook hands with 
her host, and then, pursing her lips and screwing up the 
rest of her features, said: *1 hope you 've not been waiting 
for me. I 'm sure you have, haven't you? ' And, strange 
as it may seem, this remark and this simple question 
immediately made the whole dinner party appear pre- 
posterous. 

‘No, we haven't really,' Mr. Dersingham told her, at the 
same time asking himself why in the name of thunder they 
had ever thought of inviting her. ‘ Somebody still to come. 
The Trapes.' 

'Oh, I 'm glad I 'm not the last then,' sakLMiss Verever, 
with a bitter smile, which she kept on her face while she 
was being introduced to the other guests. 

A minute later, the Trapes arrived to complete the party. 
Late guests may be divided into two classes* the repentant, 
who arrive, perspiring and profusely apologetic, to babble 
about fogs and ancient taxis and stupid drivers, and the 
unrepentant, who stalk in haughtily and look somewhat 
aggrieved when they see all the other guests, their eyebrows 
registering their disapproval of people who do not know 
what time their own parties begin. The Trapes were ad- 
mirable specimens of the unrepentant class. They were 
both tall, cold, thin, and rather featureless. Trape himself 
was an Old Worrelian and a contemporary of Dersingham's. 
He was a partner in a firm of estate agents, but called him- 
self Major Trape because he had held that rank at the end 
of the War and had become so soldierly, training the vast 
mob of boys who were conscripted then, that he could not 
bring himself to say good-bye to his outworn courtesy title. 
He was indeed so curt, so military, so imperial, that it was 
impossible to imagine him letting and selling houses in the 
ordinary way, and the mind's eye saw him mopping up, 
with a small raiding party, all flats and bijou residences, 
and sallying out with an expeditionary force to plant the 
Union Jack on finely timbered, residential and sporting 
estates. His wife was a somewhat colourless woman, very 



96 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

English in type, who always looked as if she was always 
faintly surprised and disgusted by life. Perhaps she was, 
and perhaps that was why she always talked with a certain 
ventriloquial effect, producing a voice with hardly any 
movement of her small iced features. 

Leaving them all to shout at one another, Mrs. Dersing- 
ham now slipped out of the room, for it was imperative that 
dinner should be announced as soon as possible. She 
returned three minutes later, trying not unsuccessfully to 
look as if she had not a care in the world, a sort of Arabian 
Nights hostess, and then, after the smallest interval, Agnes 
popped her head into the room , thereby forgetting one 
of her most urgent instructions, and said, without any 
enthusiasm at all: ‘Please m\ Dinner's served.' 

Mrs. Dersingham smiled heroically at her guests, who, 
with the exception of Mr. Golspie, looked at one another 
and at the door as if they were hearing about this dinner 
business for the first time and were mildly interested and 
amused. Mr. Golspie, for his part, looked like a man who 
wanted his dinner, and actually took a step or two towards 
the door. Then began that general stepping forward and 
stepping backward and smiling and hand-waving which 
take place at this moment in all those unhappy sections of 
society that have lost formality and yet have not reached 
informality. There they were, smiling and dithering round 
the door. 

‘Now then, Mrs. Pearson,' cried Mr. Golspie in his loud 
est and most brutal tones. ‘In you go.' And, without 
more ado, this impatient guest put a hand behind Mrs. 
Pearson's elbow, and Mrs. Pearson found herself through 
the door, the leader of the exodus. They crowded into 
the small dining-room, where the soup was already steam- 
ing under the four shaded electric lights. 

‘Now let me see,' Mrs. Dersingham began, as usual, feel- 
ing that these guests were not people now but six enorm- 
ous bodies of which she, the wretched criminal, had to 
dispose. ‘ Now let me see. Will you sit there, Mrs. Trape ? 
And Mrs. Pearson, there?' And then, having disposed of 
the bodies she had time to notice that the soup looked 
horribly greasy. 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 


97 


m 

The soup was bad, and Miss Verever left most of hers and 
contrived to be looking down at it very curiously every time 
Mrs. Dersingham glanced across the table at her. As there 
were eight of them, Mrs. Dersingham was not sitting at the 
end of the table, opposite her husband. Mr. Golspie was 
there, and very much at his ease, putting away a very un- 
gentlemanly quantity of bread under that great moustache 
of his. On Mr. Golspie's right were Mrs. Dersingham, 
Major Trape, and Mrs. Pearson, and on the other side were 
Miss Verever, Mr. Pearson, and Mrs. Trape. 

'And how,' said Miss Verever to Mrs. Dersingham, 'did 
you enjoy your Norfolk holiday this summer? You never 
told me that, and I 've been dying to know.' The smile 
that accompanied this statement announced that Miss 
Verever could not imagine a more idiotic of boring tbpic, 
that you would be insufferably dull if you answered her 
question and terribly rude if you didn't. 

'Not bad,' Mrs. Dersingham shouted desperately. 'In 
fact, quite good, on the whole. Rather cold, you know.' 

'Really, you found it cold?' And you would have 
sworn that the speaker meant to suggest that the cold 
had obviously been manufactured for you and that it 
served you right. 

At the other end of the table, Major Trape and his host 
were talking about football, across Mrs. Pearson, who nod- 
ded and smiled and shook her mysterious curls all the time, 
to show that she was not really being left out. 

‘Do you ever watch rugger, Golspie?' Mr. Dersingham 
demanded down the table. 

' What, Rugby ? Haven't seen a match for years,' replied 
Mr. Golspie. 'Prefer the other kind when I do watch one.' 

Major Trape raised his eyebrows. 'What, you a soccah 
man? Not this professional stuff? Don't tell me you 
like that.' 

' What 's the matter with it ? ' 

'Oh, come now! I mean, you can't possibly — I mean, 
it 's a dirty business, selling fellahs for money and so on, 
very unsporting.' 

‘I must say I agree, Trape,' said Mr. Dersingham. 
'Dashed unsporting business, I call it.' 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


98 

'Oh, certainly/ Major Trape continued, 'must be ama- 
tahs — love of the game. Play the game for its own sake, 
I say, and not as these fellahs do — for monay. Can't pos- 
sibly be a sportsman and play for monay. Oh, dirty 
business, eh, Dersingham? ' 

‘ I 'm with you there/ 

A sound came from Mrs. Trape's face and it seemed to 
declare that she was with him too. 

‘Well, I 'm not with you/ said Mr. Golspie bluntly. He 
did not care tuppence about it, one way or the other, 
but there was something in Trape's manner that demanded 
contradiction, and Mr. Golspie was not the man to ignore 
such a challenge. 'If a poor man can play a game well, 
why shouldn't he allow that game to keep him? What 's 
the answer to that ? A man 's as much right to play 
cricket and football for a living as he has to clean windows 
or sell tripe ' 

'Tripe indeed! How can you, Mr. Golspie?' cried Mrs. 
Pearson, girlishly shaking her curls at him. 

'My wife hates tripe,' said Mr. Pearson. 'Tee-tee-tee- 
tee-tee.' 

'I disagree/ said Major Trape, stiffer than ever now. 
'Those things are business, quite different. Games 
ought to be played for their own sake. That 's the 
proper English way. Love of the game. Clean sport. 
Don’t mind if the other fellahs win. Sport and business, 
two diff'rent things.' 

'Not if sport is your business,' Mr. Golspie returned, 
looking darkly mischievous. 'We can't all be rich ama- 
chures. Let the chaps have their six or seven pounds a 
week. They earn it. If one lot of chaps can earn their 
living by telling us to be good every Sunday— that is, if 
you go to listen to 'em: I don't — why shouldn't another 
lot be paid to knock a ball about every Saturday, without 
all this talk of dirty business? It beats me. Unless it 's 
snobbery. Lot o* snobbery still about in this country. It 
pops up all the time/ 

' What is this argument all about ? ' Miss Verever in- 
quired. And, perhaps feeling that Mr. Golspie needed a 
rebuke, she put on her most peculiar look and brought out 
her most disturbing tone of voice, finally throwing in a 
smile that was a tried veteran, an Old Guard. 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 99 

But Mr. Golspie returned her gaze quite calmly, and 
even conveyed a piece of fish, and far too large a piece, to 
his mouth before replying. ‘ We 're arguing about foot- 
ball and cricket. I don't suppose you 're interested. I 'm 
not much, myself. I like billiards. That 's one thing 
about coming back to this country, you can always get a 
good game of billiards. Proper tables, y' know. 

‘I used to be very fond of a game of billiards, snooker 
too/ said Mr. Pearson, nodding his head so that his fat 
cheeks shook like beef jellies, 'when I was out in Singa- 
pore. There were some splendid players at the club there, 
splendid players, make breaks of forty and fifty. But I 

wasn't one of them. Tee-tee-tee ' 

‘We went to see Susie Dean and Jerry Jemingham the 
other night,' said Major Trape, turning to Mrs. Dersing- 
ham. * Good show. Very clevah, very jdevah. You 
been to any shows lately, Mrs. Dersingham? * 

‘That 's true,' Mrs. Pearson informed her fcost and any- 
body else who cared to listen. 'When we were out in 
Singapore, my husband was always going over to the 
club for billiards. And now he hardly ever plays. I 
don't think he 's had a game this year. Have you, Walter ? 

I 'm just saying I don't think you 've had a game this 
year.' 

‘And so what with one thing and another/ Mrs. Dersing- 
ham told Major Trape, ' I 've simply not been able to see 
half the plays I 've wanted to see. Something has to go, 
hasn't it. We were out at the Trevors’ — I think you know 
them, don't you? — the shipbuilding people, you know, only 
of course these Trevors are out of that — they 're terribly in 
with all that young smart set, Mrs. Dellingham, young 
Mostyn-Price, Lady Muriel Pagworth, and the famous 
Ditchways. Well, what with that, and then going to Mrs. 
Westbury's musical tea-fight — Dossevitch and Rougeot 
ought to have been there and were only prevented from 
coming at the last minute, but Imogen Farley was there 
and played divinely. Oh, and then on top of all that, I 
went to see that new thing at His Majesty's — what 's it 
called?— -oh, yes — The Other Man . And so I haven't had 
a single moment for any other show/ 

'No, by Jove, you haven't, have you? ' said Major Trape, 
with whom this miracle of the social loaves and fishes 



100 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

worked every time. ‘You 're worse than Dorothy, and I 
tell her she overdoes it. Mustn't overdo it, you know.' 

Mrs. Dersingham, wondering how long Agnes was going 
to be bringing up the cutlets, shrugged her shoulders, and 
did it exactly as she had seen Irene Prince do it in Smart 
Women at the Ambassadors. 'It is stupid, I know/ she 
confessed charmingly, ‘ and I 'm always saying I *11 cut 
most of it out — but — well, you know what happens/ 

Miss Verever, wearing her most peculiar smile, leaned 
forward, caught the eye of her hostess, and said: 'But what 
does happen, my dear? ' 

Mrs. Dersingham was able to escape, however, by plung- 
ing at once into the talk at the other end of the table, as if 
she had not heard Miss Verever’s inquiry. * Oh, have you 
been reading that ? ' she cried across the table to Mrs. Trape, 
who did not look as if she had spoken for weeks, but never- 
theless had actually just conjured out several remarks. 
'No, I haven't read it, and I don't mean to/ But did 
Agnes mean to bring the cutlets? 

The talk at Mr. Dersingham's end, as we have guessed, 
had suddenly turned literary. Mrs. Trape had just read 
a certain book. It was, she added, apparently throwing 
her voice into the claret decanter, a very clever book. Mr. 
Dersingham had not read this book, and did not hesitate 
to say that it did not sound his kind of book, for after a 
jolly good hard day in the office he found such books too 
heavy going and preferred a detective story. Mrs. Pearson 
was actually reading a book, had been reading it that very 
afternoon, had nearly finished it and was enjoying it 
immensely. 

'And I 'm sure it 's a story you 'd like, Mr. Dersingham/ 
she cried, 'even though there aren't any detectives in it. 
I could hardly put it down. It 's all about a girl going to 
one of those Pacific Islands, one of those lovely coral and 
lagoon places, you know, and she goes there to stay with an 
uncle because she 's lost all her money and when she gets 
there she finds that he 's drinking terribly, and so she goes 
to another man — but I mustn't spoil it for you. Do read 
it, Mrs. Trape.' 

The claret decanter murmured that it would love to read 
it, and asked what the name of the book was, so that it 
might put it down on its library list. 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME ioi 

'I 'll tell you the title in a moment/ and Mrs. Pearson, 
bringing her curls to rest, bit her lip reflectively. 'Now 
how stupid of me! Do you know, I can't remember. It 's 
a very striking title, too, and that 's what made me take it 
when the girl at the library showed it to me. Now isn't 
that silly of me? ' 

'I can never remember the titles either,' Mr. Dersingham 
assured her heartily. ' What was the name of the chap who 
wrote it ? Was it a man or a woman ? ' 

‘ I think it was a man's name, in fact, I 'm nearly sure it 
was. It was quite a common name, too. Something like 
Wilson. No, it wasn't, it was Wilkinson. Walter, do you 
remember the name of the author of that book I 'm reading ? 
Wasn't it Wilkinson? ' 

'You're thinking of the man that came to mend the 
wireless set,' Mr. Pearson replied, shooting his long neck 
at her. 'That was Wilkinson. You knoW ; the people, 
Dersingham — the electricians in Earl's Court Road? ' 

' Oh, so it was. How silly of me ! ' ; 

' Tee-tee-tee-tee-tee.' 

Mrs. Pearson smiled vaguely but amiably, then said: 
'So you see I can't tell you now , but I '11 tell Mrs. Dersing- 
ham in the morning and then she can tell you.' 

A sudden silence fell on the table at that moment, per- 
haps because there was a sort of scratching sound at the 
door, which opened, but only about an inch or two. That 
silence was shattered by the most appalling crash of 
breaking crockery, followed by a short sharp wail. Then 
silence again for one sinking moment. The cutlets and 
the vegetables had arrived at last, and a brown stain, 
creeping beneath the door, told where they were. 

'My God,' cried Mr. Golspie to Miss Verever, as Mrs. 
Dersingham dashed to the door, 'there goes our dinner.' 

'Indeed!' 

‘You bet your life! ' Mr. Golspie, earnest and unabashed, 
assured her. 

Miss Verever and Major Trape exchanged glances, which 
removed Mr, Golspie once and for all from decent society 
and handed him over to the social worker and the an- 
thropologist. 

Meanwhile, Mrs. Dersingham had disappeared through 
the doorway, and Mr. Dersingham was trying to follow her 



102 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

example but could not do so because, what with cutlets, 
vegetables, gravy, broken dishes, and plates, a weeping 
Agnes, and a panic-stricken Mrs. Dersingham, there was 
no space for him. So he stood there, holding the door open, 
with his body inside the dining-room and his head outside. 

'Oh, do shut the door, Howard/ the guests heard Mrs. 
Dersingham cry. 

'All right/ the invisible head replied hesitatingly. 'But 
I say — can't I—er— do anything? I mean, do you want 
me to come out or — er — well, what do you want me to do? ' 

'Oh, go-in-and-shut-the-door.* And there was no doubt 
that in another moment Mrs. Dersingham would have 
screamed, for this was the voice of a woman in an extremity. 

Mr. Dersingham closed the door and returned to his chair. 
He looked at Major Trape, and Major Trape looked at him, 
and no doubt they were both remembering the good old 
school, Worrelians together. 

'Sorry, but — er 9 and here Mr. Dersingham looked 

round apologetically at his guests — ‘ I 'm afraid there 's 
been some sort of accident outside/ 

Immediately, Mrs. Trape, Mrs. Pearson, Major Trape, 
and Mr. Pearson began talking all at once, not talking 
about this accident but about accidents in general, with 
special reference to very queer accidents that had hap- 
pened to them. Miss Verever merely looked peculiarly at 
everybody, while Mr. Golspie finished his claret with a 
certain remote gloom, as if he were a man taking quinine 
on the summit of a mountain. 

Then the door, which had not been properly fastened, 
swung open again, to admit a mixed knocking and gobbling 
and guggling noise that suggested that Agnes was now 
lying on the floor, in hysterics, and drumming her feet. 
Then came a new voice, very hoarse and resentful, and this 
voice declared that it was all a crying shame, even if the 
girl was clumsy with her hands, and that one pair of hands 
was one pair of hands and could not be expected to be any 
more, and that while notices were being given right and 
left, her notice could be taken, there and then. In short, 
the cook had arrived on the scene. 

Mr. Dersingham arose miserably, but whether to shut 
the door again or to make an entrance into the drama out- 
side we shall never know, for Mrs. Pearson, fired with 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 103 

neighbourly solicitude, sprang up, crying, ‘Poor Mrs. 
Dersingham! I'm sure I ought to do something,' and 
was outside, with the door closed behind her, before Mr. 
Dersingham knew what was happening. 

And Mrs. Pearson, once outside, did not simply intrude, 
did not gape and hang about and get in the way, but took 
charge of the situation, for though Mrs. Pearson may have 
been a foolish table-talker, may have worn mysterious 
curls, and been old-fashioned and monstrously girlish and 
affectionate, she was a housewife of experience, who had 
weathered the most fantastic tropical domestic storms in 
Singapore. 

‘I knew you wouldn't mind my coming out,' she cried, 
‘ and I felt I must help, because after all we are neighbours, 
aren't we, and that makes a difference.’ 

‘It's too absurd,' Mrs. Dersingham wsailed. ‘This 
wretched girl's smashed everything and ruined the dinner 
and now she 's going off into a fit or something out of sheer 
temper. And it 's all her own fault. I engaged her sister 
to come and help her to-night, and then when her sister 
couldn't come, at the last minute of course, She wouldn't 
let me get anybody else, she said she could db it herself.' 

Mrs. Pearson was looking at Agnes, who was still guggling 
and drumming on the floor. ‘Only stupid hysterics. Get 
up at once, you silly, silly girl. Do you hear? You 're in 
the way. We '11 pour cold water over her. That will soon 
bring her round, you '11 see.' 

The cook, who was standing in the hall, a few yards 
away, and had been looking on with the air of a complacent 
prophetess, now began to lose some of her rigidity. The 
mournful triumph died out of her face. She had no respect 
for Mrs. Dersingham, but for some strange reason she had 
almost a veneration for Mrs. Pearson, who was possibly a 
far more ladylike and commanding figure in her eyes. 

‘That 's so,' the cook hoarsely declared now. 'A jug of 
water 's what she wants. Accidents will happen and one 
pair of hands can't be two or three pairs of hands, eight for 
dinner being out of all reason with them steps and no 
service lift, but there 's no call to be lying there all night, 
Agnes, having your hysterics and carrying on silly when 
there 's all this mess to be cleared, let alone anything else.' 

This treacherous withdrawal of a stout ally, combined 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


104 

with the talk of cold water, soon brought the hysterics to 
mere choking and sniffing, and in a minute or two Agnes 
was bending over the ruins. 1 1 'll clear these away/ she 
announced between sniffs and chokes, 'but I won't bring 
anything else and serve it, I won't. I couldn't if I tried, I 
couldn't. I haven't a nerve in me body, not after what ’s 
happened, I haven't.' 

'But I shall have to give them something ,' Mrs. Dersing- 
ham was saying. Clearly she no longer included Mrs. 
Pearson among the guests. Mrs. Pearson had ceased to be 
one of 'them.' 

'Of course you will, my dear,' cried Mrs. Pearson, her 
eyes gleaming with a happy excitement. 'Not that we *d 
mind, of course. It ’s the men, isn’t it? You know what 
the men are? Now then, what about eggs?' 

'Eggs,' the cook repeated, hoarsely and gloomily. 

' There 's two eggs, an' two eggs only, in that kitchen. 
Just the two eggs, and them 's for the morning.' 

'Listen, my dear.' And Mrs. Pearson clutching at her 
neighbour affectionately and imploringly. ' Do leave it to 
me and I promise you I won’t be ten minutes. I won't, 
really. Now not a word! Don’t bother about anything . 
Just you leave it to me.’ She hurried towards the outer 
door, pulled herself up before she reached it, and cried over 
her shoulder: ‘But warm some plates, that 's all.' 

During the subsequent interval, Mrs. Dersingham had 
not the heart to return to the dining-room, though she did 
just look in, put hei face round the door and smile apolo- 
getically at everybody and say that it was too absurd and 
annoying and that the two of them, she and Mrs. Pearson, 
would be back again in a few minutes, She spent the rest 
of the time superintending the salvage work outside the 
dining-room door and helping cook to find enough fresh 
plates to warm. She felt hot, dishevelled, and miserable. 
She could have cried. Indeed, that was why she did not 
slip upstairs to her bedroom to look at herself and powder 
her nose, for once there, really alone with herself, she was 
sure she would have cried. Oh, it was all too hateful for 
words! 

' There ! ' And Mrs. Pearson stood before her, breathless, 
flushed, and happy, and whipped off the lid of a silver dish. 

‘OhP cried Mrs. Dersingham, in the very reek of the 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 105 

omelette, a fine large specimen. 'You angel! It ' s abso- 
lutely perfect.' 

' I remembered we had some eggs, and then I remembered 
we had a bottle of mushrooms tucked away somewhere, 
and so I rushed upstairs and made this mushroom omelette. 
It ought to be nice. I used to be good with omelettes.’ 

'It's marvellous. And I don't know how to begin to 
thank you, my dear.’ And Mrs. Dersingham meant it. 
From that moment, Mrs. Pearson ceased to be a merely 
foolish if kindly neighbour and became a friend, worthy 
of the most secret confidences. In the steam of the 
omelette, rich as the smoke of burnt offerings, this friend- 
ship began, and Mrs. Dersingham never tasted a mushroom 
afterwards without being reminded of it. 

‘Don’t think of it, my dear,' said Mrs. Pearson happily, 
for her own life, after months of the dull routine of time- 
killing, had suddenly become crimson, rich ;and glorious. 
‘Now, have you got the plates ready? You must have 
this served at once, mustn’t you ? Where 's that silly girl? 
Gone to bed? All right, then, make the c6ok serve the 
rest of the dinner. She must have everything ready by 
this time. Call her, my dear. Tell her to bring up the 
plates.' And they returned at last to the dining-room, 
two sisters out of burning Troy. 

Alas, all was not well in there. Something had happened 
during the interval of waiting. It was not the women, who 
were all sympathetic smiles and solicitude : Mrs. Trape even 
dropped the ventriloquial effect, actually disturbed the 
lower part of her face, in order to explain that she knew, no 
one better, what it was these days, when anything might 
be expected of that class; and Miss Verever, though re- 
taining automatically some peculiarities of tone and 
grimace, contrived to say something reassuring. No, it 
was the men. Mr. Golspie looked like a man who had 
already said some brutal things and was fully prepared to 
say some more; Major Trape looked very stiff and un- 
compromising, as if he had just sentenced a couple of 
surveyors to be shot ; Mr. Pearson gave the impression that 
he had been faintly tee-teeing on both sides of a quarrel 
and was rather tired of it; and Mr. Dersingham looked 
uneasy, anxious, exasperated. There was no mistaking 
the atmosphere, in which distant thunder still rolled. The 



io6 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

stupid men had had to wait for the more substantial part 
of dinner; they had felt empty, then they had felt cross; 
and so they had argued, shouted, quarrelled, not all of 
them perhaps, but certainly Mr. Golspie and Major Trape. 
Probably at any moment, they would begin arguing, 
shouting, quarrelling again. Mrs. Dersingham, very tired 
now and with a hundred little nerves screaming to be taken 
out of all this and put to bed, would have liked to have 
banged their silly heads together. 

Cook came in, breathing heavily and disapprovingly, 
and gave them their omelette. There was not a single 
movement she made during the whole time she was in the 
room that did not announce, quite plainly, that she was the 
cook, that the kitchen was her place, that she did not 
pretend to be able to wait at table and that if they did not 
like it, they could lump it. Her heavy breathing went 
further, pointing out that when she did condescend to wait 
at table, she expected to find a better company than this 
seated round it. Even Mrs. Pearson had apparently lost 
favour, for she had her plate shoved contemptuously in 
front of her, like the rest. Real ladies, that plate said, 
don't rush away and cook omelettes for other people's 
dinner tables. * P'raps you '11 ring when you want the 
next,' the cook wheezed, and then slowly, scornfully, took 
her departure. 

'If you don’t mind my saying so, Mrs. Dersingham,' said 
Major Trape, ‘ this omelette's awf 'ly good, awf 'ly good. And 
there 's nothing I like better than a jolly good omelette.' 

A voice from Mrs. Trape's direction said that it agreed 
with him. 

'They 're right there,’ said Mr. Golspie to Mrs. Dersing- 
ham, as if the Trapes were nqt often right. 'It 's as good 
an omelette as I 've had for months and months, and that 's 
saying something, because I 've been in places where they 
can make omelettes. They can't make 'em here in Eng- 
land.' And he said this in such a way as to suggest that 
ft was really a challenge to Trape, who was nothing if not 
patriotic. Obviously, he and Trape had been quarrelling. 

Major Trape stiffened, then smiled laboriously at Ins 
hostess. ' Mr. Golspie seems to think we can't make any- 
thing in England. That 's where he and I diffah. Isn't it, 
Dersingham?* 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 107 

‘Well, yes, in a way, I suppose/ Mr. Dersingham mum- 
bled unhappily. He felt divided between Worrell and 
Angel Pavement, between his old and respected school 
friend, Trape, with whom he instinctively agreed, and the 
forceful man who was now saving Twigg and Dersingham 
and making it prosperous, his guest for the first time, too ; 
and it was a wretched situation. He muttered now that 
there was a lot to be said on both sides. 

‘There may be/ said Major Trape. ‘But I don't like to 
hear a man continually runnin' down his own country. 
Tastes diffah, I suppose. But I feel — well it isn't done, 
that 's all/ 

‘Time it was done then/ said Mr. Golspie aggressively. 
‘Most of the people I meet here these days seem to be 
living in a fool's paradise ' 

‘Now, Mr. Golspie/ cried his hostess, with desperate 
vivacity, ‘ you 're not to call us all fools. Is he* Mrs. Trape ? 
We won't have it.' Then, saving the situation at all cost, 
she turned to Miss Verever. ‘My dear, I forgot to tell you, 
I 've had the absurdest letter from Alice. Wien I read it, 
I simply howled.' 

‘No, did you? ' said Miss Verever. 

‘A-ha!' cried Mr. Dersingham, doing his best. ‘What 's 
the latest from Alice. We must all hear about this.’ 

They were all listening now, all at peace for the moment. 

‘Oh, it was too ridiculous,' cried Mrs. Dersingham, 
despairingly racking her brains to remember something 
amusing in that letter, or, failing that, something amusing 
in any letter she had ever had from anybody. ‘You know 
what Alice is — at least, you do, my dear, and so do you. I 
suppose it isn't really funny unless you know her. You 
see, the minute I read a letter of hers, of course I can see 
her in my mind and hear her voice and all that sort of thing, 
and unless you can do that, well, I dare say it isn't so funny 
after all. But, you see, Alice — she 's my youngest sister, I 
must explain ; and they live down in Devon — oh, miles from 
anywhere. Will you ring, please, darling ? Well, Alice has 
a dog, the absu-u-urdest creature ' 

She struggled through with it somehow, and fortunately 
cook made such a noise clearing and then serving the sweet 
that most of the anecdote, presumably the funniest part, 
was lost in the clatter. The cook had been so noisy, so 



io8 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

incredibly heavy in her breathing, and so obviously dis- 
approving, when she was serving the sweet, that Mrs. 
Dersingham dare not have her up again to clear the table 
for dessert, so as the fruit plates and the finger bowls, the 
port decanter and glasses, were all on the sideboard, she 
made a joke of it — showing the last gleam of vivacity she 
felt she would be able to show for months — and she and 
Dersingham, assisted by Mr. Pearson, who said — tee- tee- 
tee-tee-tee — that he was used to clearing a table, having 
been well brought up, did what they could to make the 
dinner look as if it were coming to a civilized end. Mrs. 
Dersingham felt that Mr. Golspie, plainly a porty sort of 
man, and Major Trape might not want to argue so un- 
pleasantly once they had some port inside them. This was 
the longest and most ghastly dinner she ever remembered. 
It was not really very late, but it seemed like two in the 
morning. As she tried to peel a very soft pear, she felt she 
wanted to throw it at the opposite wall and then scream at 
the top of her voice. 

It was then they heard a ring at the outer door. Perhaps 
the postman, rather late and with something special to 
deliver. A minute or so later, there came another and 
longer ring. 

‘ The only time we were there it rained for a whole week/ 
said Major Trape, concluding his account of the watering 
places, 1 and so I said, "Nevah again/* Can*t imagine how 
these towns get their reputation. These weathah reports 
they give out * 

Another ring, very determined this time. 

*1 *m sorry, but do go and see who that is at the door, 
my dear/ Mrs. Dersingham cried apologetically. T 've 
just remembered. Agnes has gone to bed, and cook 
probably can't hear or won't hear. I don’t suppose it ’s 
anybody but the late post/ 

Mr. Dersingham was absent several minutes, and some- 
how during that time nobody appeared to want to talk. 
Mrs. Dersingham did not press the fruit upon her guests. 
The moment the last piece was eaten, she intended to rise 
from the table, and then — oh, thank heaven! — the worst 
was over. The men could stay on drinking port and quarrel 
like cats and dogs if they liked. She would be out of it, 
among nice, silly, comfortable women in the drawing-room, 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 109 

and so it would all be over. And then, just as she was 
nearly succeeding in consoling herself, her husband re- 
appeared, and he was not alone. The idiot had brought 
a complete stranger into the dining-room with him, a girl. 

She was a very pretty girl, quite young, and on his face 
was that fatuous smile which husbands always seem to 
wear in the company of young and very pretty girls. All 
wives recognize and detest that fatuous smile. It is bad 
at any time, but when it accompanies a girl who is a com- 
plete stranger into the dining-room at the conclusion of a 
disastrous dinner, and brings her into the presence of a 
wife who has not felt even decently presentable for hours 
and hours and who has been ready to scream for the last 
forty-five minutes, then it is a catastrophe and a mortal 
injury. And so Mrs. Dersingham gave Mr. Dersingham 
one look that sent that fatuous smile trembling into 
oblivion. And then, half rising from her chair, Mrs. Der- 
singham looked at the stranger, and decided ait once that 
she had never before seen a girl she disliked so much at 
sight as this one. 

4 1 *m afraid — er — I don't ’ she began. 

But the girl was not even looking at her. She was busy 
having her left cheek brushed by the large moustache ol 
Mr. Golspie, who had flung an arm round her shoulders. 

'Well, hang me, Lena girl,' Mr. Golspie was roaring, * if I 
hadn’t forgotten all about you.' 

'You would,' said the girl coolly. 'You're a rotten 
father. I 've told you that before. Now introduce me.' 


IV 

‘Now this is my fault,* Mr. Golspie boomed at the Der- 
singhams, turning from one to the other, ‘ my fault entirely. 
I ought to have told you. I meant to, but I forgot. This 
girl of mine wrote to say she was coming from Paris to-day, 
but of course she didn't say how and when and what and 
where, just left it all vague, y' know, as usual, all up in the 
air. When it got to be half-past seven and she hadn't 
turned up, I began to wonder. What was I to do?' And 
as he asked this he stared fiercely at Mr. Pearson, who 
happened to catch his eye. 



no ANGEL PAVEMENT 

'Quite so, Mr. Golspie/ Mr. Pearson, startled, jerked out. 

'Well, I '11 tell you what I did do. I left a message with 
the caretaker of the flats, so that if she did come she *d 
know where I was ' 

'All right, my dear/ his daughter interrupted, 'you 
needn't go on and on. Nobody wants to hear all about 
it. I got the message. I wasn't going to spend hours all 
alone in that poisonous flat. So I took a taxi and came 
here. And that 's that.' And having thus dismissed the 
subject, Miss Golspie, who seemed an astonishingly cool 
and composed young lady, smiled at Mrs. Dersingham, 
who did not return the smile. Miss Golspie then produced 
a small mirror from her handbag and carefully examined 
her features in it. 

And even Mrs. Dersingham would have been compelled 
to admit that they were very charming features. Lena 
Golspie still remained, after closer inspection, a very pretty 
girl. She had reddish-gold hair, large brown eyes, an im- 
pudent little nose, and a luscious mouth. She looked rather 
smaller than she actually was. Her neck, shoulders, and 
arms were slenderly, even too delicately, fashioned, but she 
had strong, well-shaped legs ; and was indeed the complete 
attractive young female animal. Only in a certain slant of 
the eye and some movements of the mouth did she resemble 
her father, though a very acute listener might have found 
some likeness in their voices. Their accent, however, was 
quite different, for Mr. Golspie spoke with a breadth of 
vowel sound and roughness of consonants that suggested 
the toned-down Lowlander or North-country Englishman, 
whereas his daughter's English did not properly belong 
to any part of England but seemed to be that international 
English, of a kind that a clever foreigner might pick up 
in the Anglo-Saxon colony in Paris and that is sometimes 
spoken by both English and Americans on the stage, a lan- 
guage without roots and background, a language for 'the 
talkies.' Indeed, in Lena's company, you might have felt 
you were taking part in a ' talkie.' 

'And I intended to tell you when I first came in,' Mr. 
Golspie continued, determined to have his say. 'Just to 
warn you that this daughter o' mine — who doesn't behave 
herself as nicely as she looks, I can tell you — might be 
landing herself on you.' 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME in 

* Quite all right, of course/ said Mr. Dersingham. * 1 mean 
—delighted ! * 

‘ Good ! No harm done then/ And Mr. Golspie sat down, 
grinned at his daughter, noticed the decanter in front of 
him and promptly helped himself to another glass of port. 

'But I must say/ cried Lena, who had now concluded 
the examination of her own features and was busy ex- 
amining everybody else's, ' I thought you 'd have finished 
dinner hours ago. Did you begin late or have you been 
wolfing an awful lot ? ' 

' I think we ‘d better all go straight into the drawing- 
room/ said Mrs. Dersingham hurriedly, ‘unless you men 
feel you must stay and drink some more port.' 

'Not a bit/ said Mr. Golspie heartily. 'I 'm ready, for 
one/ And to show that he was, he drained his glass in one 
sharp gulp. 

'Only too delighted, Mrs. Dersingham/ said Jfajor Trape, 
bowing and looking very severe, as if indirectly to rebuke 
the uncouth Golspie. „ J 

'Good work!* said Mr. Dersingham, who obviously felt 
that something was still wrong somewhere and was trying 
in vain to appear hearty and enthusiatic. He opened the 
door. ‘ Much better if we all barge in together now/ 

'Come along, Miss Golspie/ and the patient little smile 
that Mrs. Dersingham contrived to produce was itself a 
studied insult. ‘We don’t mind a bit your not being 
dressed. It doesn’t matter at all, I assure you/ 

Miss Golspie turned wondering large brown eyes upon 
her. 'Oh, did you want me to change? I would have 
done if I ’d known — specially as I ’ve brought over one 
or two marvellous new dresses — but it didn’t seem worth 
it. Sony and all that ! ' 

'Not in the least/ replied Mrs. Dersingham, pale with 
weariness and vexation. Cheerfully — oh, so cheerfully! — 
she could have murdered this girl. 

They trooped rather silently into the drawing-room, 
which did not seem particularly pleased to see them. It 
had been neglected itself for some time — so that the fire 
was low and ashy — and now it did not seem to welcome 
visitors. Cook arrived with coffee, and put down the tray 
with the air of a camel exhibiting the last straw. She did 
not attempt to serve it. She out it down on the rickety 



1 1 2 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

little table and immediately made that table seem ten times 
more rickety. There was no cup for Miss Golspie, who of 
course said at once that she would have some coffee, and so 
Mr. Dersingham, with what seemed to his wife a great deal 
of unnecessary fuss and silliness, insisted that he should go 
without. And then, having taken the tiniest sip of coffee, 
this Golspie girl ostentatiously put the cup on one side, and, 
on being asked by Mr. Pearson, who had also turned silly 
and officious, if she would have some more, replied that she 
did not really want any coffee. 

'I *11 tell you what, though,* she declared, in a loud clear 
voice, 'I 'd adore a cocktail, if there are any going.' 

'Oh, would you. Miss Golspie?' Mr. Dersingham began. 

'Well, I dare say I could rake up ' But he was not 

allowed to continue. 

' I 'm afraid there aren't any cocktails going,' said Mrs. 
Dersingham, in a voice that was if anything louder and 
clearer, and as frosted as the best Martini. 

And the insensitive Mr. Golspie did not improve the 
situation by chiming in with ' I should think not. Don't 
you take any notice of her, Mrs. Dersingham. I 'II give 
her cocktails! ' 

‘ When you get her home, ch ? ' Mr. Pearson cried, with 
rash facetiousness. 'Tee-tee-tee-tee-tee.' 

It was easily his least successful ' Tee-tee ' of the evening. 
Mrs. Pearson looked surprised at him. Mr. Golspie gave 
him a glance that told him quite plainly to mind his own 
business and not try to be funny. Lena herself shot a 
furious glance at both her father and Mr. Pearson, but did 
not cast a single look in Mrs. Dersingham's direction — a 
very ominous sign. As for Mrs. Dersingham, she could not 
decide which was the more awful, Mr. Golspie or his terrible 
daughter. She tried to start a conversation with Mrs. 
Pearson, who was now all embarrassed smiles, and Mrs. 
Trape, whose face had been completely frost-bound for the 
last ten minutes. 

Miss Verever, every feature in battle order, now bore 
down on Lena, opening the engagement with a long-range 
smile of the most sinister peculiarity. 'Do I understand, 
Miss Golspie,' she said, with the most mysterious grimace 
and the most baffling inflections, ' that you have just come 
from Paris? Have you been living there? ' 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 113 

'Hello, hello!’ cried Lena’s startled expression. 'What 
have I done to yon?’ But all she actually said in reply 
was: 'Yes, I 've just come from there, and I 've been living 
there.' 

'Oh, you have been living there? ’ 

'Yes, for the last eighteen months. With an uncle. 
You see, he lives there, and I 've been living with him.' 

'Oh, your uncle lives there? ' 

'Yes, he's lived there nearly all his life. He is half 
French, anyhow. And my aunt 's completely French.' 

‘Then is your father — Mr. Golspie — half French? ' asked 
Miss Verever, in one of her strangest whispers. 

'No, not at all,' said Lena, with a little impatient shake 
of her head. 'You see, this uncle 's my mother's brother, 
not my father's.' 

'Oh, your mother's.' And now Miss Verever produced 
her most famous glance of inquiry, awfully enigmatical in 
its final meaning and yet immediately challenging. She 
followed it up with a new smile, crooked, terrible. 'Well, 
then, of course, your mother must be half French, I suppose, 
just like your uncle? ' 

'Yes, she was.' And then Lena's little nose wrinkled, 
partly in bewilderment, partly in distaste. Then she 
looked straight at Miss Verever, who was bending over her 
and searching her with an unwinking gaze. ‘But what 
about it ? I mean, there 's nothing particularly funny 
about that, is there? Lots of people are half French, 
aren't they? ' 

'Yes, I suppose so.' Miss Verever was taken aback. 

'Well, then, what are you looking at me like that for? ' 
cried Lena, at once registering a direct hit. 'I mean, you 
look as if there was something terribly weird about it all. 
There really isn't, you know. It 's all quite simple.' The 
shell crashed through and exploded somewhere near the 
magazine. 

Miss Verever was jerked upright by her surprise. Then 
she turned glacial. 'I beg your pardon.' 

' Oh, I don't mind, but ' 

Miss Verever did not wait to hear, but turned away 
at once and joined the other three women. Lena, after 
staring after her for a moment, gave a tiny wriggle and 
then broke into a duet of Old Worrelian talk between 



114 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

Mr. Dersingham and Major Trapc, who was merely chival- 
rous at first but very soon began to wear that fatuous smile. 
And towards the three of them an icy current began to flow 
from the group of women. Too tired, too cross, even to 
pretend to be a good brisk hostess, Mrs. Dersingham let the 
whole thing slide, and merely prayed for the end. It was 
not long in coming. 

1 Shall I ? * Miss Golspie was heard to cry to the two men. 

They nodded and smiled, a little doubtfully perhaps, but 
still they nodded and smiled, men under a spell. 

‘All right, then, I will. Just to cheer us all up. We Te 
getting terribly dismal/ And Miss Golspie, with a final 
and coquettish nod and smile of her own at the other two 
nodders and smilers, marched across the room, puffing 
away at one of her host's Sahibs. Then she sat down at 
the baby grand. 

‘That 's the way, Lena/ her father shouted approvingly. 
He had been talking in a comer to Mr. Pearson. ‘Let 's 
have a tune. Do us good/ 

Before anybody else could say a word, Lena had begun 
playing. She played some dance tunes, very sketchily, 
but with great speed and noise. The first two or three 
minutes were bad, but the next tw r o or three minutes were 
much worse, for then her left hand, guessing wildly, began 
hitting any note roughly in the neighbourhood of the right 
one, and the very fire irons joined* in the din. After ten 
minutes, she reached a grand fortissimo . Mrs. Dersingham 
could stand it no longer. 

‘Oh, do stop that noise/ she shrieked, rushing forward, 
white and trembling with fury. 

Lena stopped at once. They were all fixed, rooted, in a 
vast sudden silence. 

Mrs. Dersingham bit her lip, recovered herself. ‘ I 'm 
sorry/ she said, coldly and curtly, ‘but I really must ask 
you to stop playing. I 've — got a bad headache/ 

‘I see/ replied Lena, getting up from the piano. ‘Sorry/ 
She walked forward a step or two, then looked at Mrs. 
Dersingham. ‘Have you had it all the evening or has it 
just come on now ? ' And this was not a polite inquiry, but 
a challenge. The tone of voice made that obvious. 

‘Does that matter?' And Mrs. Dersingham turned 
away. 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 115 

Into the silence that fell now there came the voice, 
quavering a little, of Mrs. Pearson. 'Now I really think 
it 's time we were going/ it began. But nobody took any 
notice of it. 

For Lena burst into a torrent of speech. 'No, it doesn't 
matter, of course. But I just asked because I thought you 
might have started that headache since I came, because 
you 've just been as rotten as you could be, and I didn't 
ask to come — I 've been travelling half the day and I 'm as 
tired as you are — and I wouldn't have come at all if my 
father hadn't told me to, and I thought you were friends of 
his, but from the minute I came in, you 've not saida 
decent word to me or given me a decent look ' 

'Hoy!' roared her father, seizing her by the arm and 
shaking her a little. ' What the blazes is all thifc ? What 's 
the matter with you, girl? That 's not the way to 
behave ' 

'No, and that's not the way to behave either/ cried 
Lena, shaking herself free. ' What have I done ? I didn't 
want to push myself into her beastly house.* And then 
she grabbed her father’s arm and burst into tears. ' I 'm 
going/ she sobbed. 'Take me home.' 

Mr. Golspie put an arm round her and she Continued her 
sobbing on his shoulder. ‘Sorry about this/ he said, over 
her head. 'My fault, I expect. I oughtn't to have told 
her to come. The kid/s a bit nervy — tired, y’ know.' 

‘Yes, of course — travelling and all that/ said Mr. Dersing- 
ham, feeling that some reply was expected. 

This was Mrs. Dersingham’s chance, but she did not take 
it. She might have accepted the apology if her husband 
had not been so ready to accept it and make an excuse for 
the girl. But now she turned her back on Mr. Golspie and 
his terrible daughter, and said to Mrs. Pearson : ' Must you 
really go? It 's quite early, you know. Oh, Mrs. Trape, 
you 're not going, are you ? Why ? ' And it was well done, 
bravely done, but it was a mistake, perhaps the biggest 
mistake she ever made. 

Mr. Golspie's face changed its expression, all the good 
humour dying out of it at once. ‘ All right/ he said shortly. 

‘ Come on, Lena, shake yourself up a bit. We 're going now. 
Good night all. See you in the morning, Dersingham. 
Good night.' And immediately he marched himself and 
E 93® 



ti6 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

his daughter out of the room, and, a minute later, before 
Dersingham had followed him up, out of the house. 

Half an hour later, the Dersinghams were alone, and Mrs. 
Dersingham was curled up in the largest chair, crying. 'I 
don't care, I don't care,' she sobbed. ‘They were awful , 
both of them. The man was nearly as bad as his terrible 
daughter. They were ghastly, and I hope to Heaven I 
never see either of them again. Or any of those people, 
except Mrs. Pearson. Oh, what a horrible, ghastly 
evening!' 

‘I know, I know, my dear,* said her husband, hovering 
about vaguely and trying to be consoling. ‘Everything 
went wrong. I know.' 

‘No, you don't, you can't possibly know how awful it 
was for me. No, don't touch me, leave me alone. I just 
want to go miles and miles away, and never see anybody 
for months. Don't ever let me see those vile Golspies 
again. And I don’t care what I said or did. It couldn't 
be too bad for them. Next time, if you want to invite 
anybody from Angel Pavement, invite the clerks and the 
typists, anybody before those awful Golspies.' 

‘There, there,' said Mr. Dersingham, ‘there, there, there.' 
And when dialogue is reduced to this, it is time we quitted 
the scene. 

Lena, in the taxi that carried them away from Barkfield 
Gardens, had stopped crying and was now fiercely resentful, 
like the spoilt child she was. ‘Well, they were rotten snobs. 
And it wasn't my fault that half her beastly dinner had 
been dropped outside the door; I didn't even know until 
you told me; and it was probably a good job for you, it was 
dropped, for I '11 bet it was the most awful muck. But 
there wasn't one of those old cats who gave me a decent 
look or spoke a decent word to me. You ought to have 
seen that long thin bony one when I asked her what she 
was looking so funny about! And you needn't think it 
was only me they didn't like, either. They didn't like you, 
I could see that. They weren't real friends, any of them.' 

‘Who said they were, young woman?' her father de- 
manded. ‘Don't make such a palaver about it. I know 
all about 'em. The best of the lot was that chap with the 
long neck and the wobbly cheeks — Pearson, the chap from 
Singapore — and he was only half baked. If Dersingham's 



THE DERSINGHAMS AT HOME 117 

wife doesn’t think we ’re good enough for them, let her go 
on thinking so. I ’ll bet she thinks I 'm good enough to 
keep on putting some ginger in that half dead concern of 
theirs. After what I ’ve seen of the Dersingham end of 
Twigg and Dersingham, all I can say is that Twigg, who- 
ever he was, must have been a dam’ smart chap to have got 
the firm going at all.’ 

‘You don’t mean to say you 're making money for those 
blighters?’ cried Lena, winding an arm round his. 

‘The people I 'm going to make money for,' replied Mr. 
Golspie grimly, at the same time -squeezing the arm, 'are 
these people, these two here. Just you keep quiet and 
leave it to me. Miss Golspie.’ 



CHAPTER IV 


TURGIS SEES HER 
I 

» 

Turgis was not lazy and while he was in the office he pre- 
ferred doing something to doing nothing, but he did not 
share Mr. Smeeth’s enthusiasm for office work and never 
regarded himself as one of the firm. It was all very well 
for Twigg and Dersingham to be suddenly busy again, 
indeed much busier than they had ever been before, but 
Turgis did not see the fun of going hard at it all day and 
every day and frequently having to stay an hour later. No 
doubt somebody was doing well out of it, but he, Turgis, 
was getting nothing out of it but a great deal more work. 
He grumbled about this to Mr. Smeeth. It was Saturday 
morning; he had just received his fortnight’s pay, six 
pound notes, one ten-shilling note, and two florins; and it 
was a time for such confidences. 

‘AH right, all right,’ said Mr. Smeeth, with the manner 
of a person who knew a great deal. ‘ That 's your point of 
view, isn’t it?' 

Turgis, a little diffidently now, for he had a considerable 
respect for Mr. Smeeth, if no particular liking for him, re- 
plied that it was. 

‘Now let me tell you something, my boy,’ Mr. Smeeth 
continued gravely. ‘Just a week or two ago— I ’ll tell you 
exactly what day it was; it was the day Mr. Golspie first 
called here— Mr. Dersingham was talking things over with 
me, in that room there. I ’m telling you this in confidence, 
mind. And Mr. Dersingham said the office expenses were 
too big and somebody would have to go. And it looked as 
if that somebody would be you.’ 

‘Mel’ Turgis’s mouth, always open a little, was now 
wide open, for his jaw suddenly dropped. 

‘You, Turgis,’ said Mr. Smeeth, with the satisfied air ot 



TURGIS SEES HER 119 

a man who has produced the desired effect. ‘It was touch 
and go whether I told you that very day. I 'm glad I 
didn't because you might have got a fright for nothing. 
Now it 's all right, of course. We 're busy, and we need 
everybody. But when you want to start grumbling about 
a bit of extra work, my boy, just you remember that. You 
might have been looking for work now, and I 'll bet you 
wouldn't have liked that, would you? ' 

'No, I wouldn't, Mr. Smeeth,' replied Turgis, humbly 
enough. 

'And I don't blame you.' Feeling fairly confident, for 
once, about his own job, Mr. Smeeth had a great desire 
to enlarge upon this topic, which had for him a terrible 
fascination. ‘Jobs aren’t easy to get, are they ? ' 

'Not if you haven’t influence and you 're not in the know, 
Mr. Smeeth,’ said Turgis, who was a great believer in the 
mysterious power of influence and being in the know, and 
realized only too well that there were few people in London 
who had less influence or were further from the know than 
himself. ‘That's the trouble. I seen it myself. You 
can't get a look in. I'da packet — my words, J 'd a packet 
— before I got taken on here. Trailin’ round, jqueueing up, 
round again — oh, dear! You know what it 's like.' 

‘No, I don’t,' Mr. Smeeth returned, sharply. 

‘Beg your pardon, Mr. Smeeth. Of course, you don't. 
I do, though. Oo, it 's sorful,' cried Turgis earnestly. 
‘'S'not getting any better either. Well, I 'm glad you told 
me, Mr. Smeeth. I 'd better keep my mouth shut a bit, 
hadn't I ? It is all right, now, isn’t it ? ' 

‘Quite all right. You do your best for us/ Mr. Smeeth 
added, sententiously, ‘and we ’ll do our best for you.' 

Turgis came nearer, and lowered his voice when he spoke. 
‘D'you think, Mr. Smeeth, there'll be any chance of a 
rise, now I 'm getting all this extra work? Ought to be, 
oughtn't there? I mean, I 'm not getting a lot really, 
am I?’ 

'You leave it alone a bit, Turgis, and just do your best, 
and then I '11 see what I can do for you.' 

‘I wish you would, Mr. Smeeth. You see, it *s not as if 
I 'd got anybody helping me with my work, 'cos this new 
typist doesn't really help me out much, does she? And if 
you could — just — you know —say something to Mr. Golspie 



120 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


or Mr. Dersingham, because, you know, Mr. Smeeth, I ani 
doing my best, and you mustn't think I want to grumble, 
'cos I don't/ 

The new typist had been a great disappointment to 
Turgis, not because she was of no assistance to him in his 
work but because she was not the attractive young creature 
his heated fancy had conjured up to fill the post. Miss 
Poppy Sellers, with her unfortunate Oriental effect which 
merely resulted in dinginess and untidiness, did not seem to 
him at all pretty. At the end of the first morning, though 
he was flattered by her awe of him, he had dismissed her as 
a very poor bit of girl stuff. When he had heard that the 
firm was advertising for another typist, a younger girl to 
help Miss Matfield, he had had instant visions of working 
side by side with one of those really pretty ones he often 
noticed making their way about the city. There were one 
or two good ones in Angel Pavement itself : quite a pretty 
piece downstairs with the Kwik-Work Razor Blade Co.; 
another not so dusty who went up the stairs next door to 
C. Warstein: Tailors Trimmings; and a real beauty — one 
to make your mouth water, a peach — at Dunbury & Co.: 
Incandescent Gas Fittings , at the end of the street. And 
there were two or three worth looking at, the flashy young 
Jewessy type, at Chase & Cohen's Carnival Novelties place 
at the end. Any one of these girls, walking into Twigg and 
Dersingham 's, would have lit up the place for him, and the 
day's routine would have become an adventure. But they 
must go and choose this dreary-looking kid with the fringe. 
It was just his luck. Two girls working in the same office, 
and neither of them any good. Miss Matfield was all right 
in her way, of course, but then she was too big, too old, and 
far too 'posh' and bossy for him, even if she had ever 
showed any sign — and, so far, she hadn't— of being really 
interested in his existence. This other one. Poppy Sellers, 
was interested enough, quite ready to be friends, but then, 
well — look at her. 

The maddening thing about it — and it really was mad- 
dening to Turgis — was that all these other ripe and ador- 
able girls (he thought of them as ‘fine bits') were all over 
the place, walking in and out of offices, sitting in comers of 
teashops, elbowing him sometimes (and he was always there 
to be elbowed) in buses and tube trains, so that you might 



121 


TURGIS SEES HER 

have thought they worked for everybody in the City but 
Twigg and Dersingham. And it was no better, perhaps it 
was worse, when he was roaming about for pleasure and not 
simply going to and from the office. Everywhere he saw 
them, never missed seeing them. His mind was for ever 
busy with their images, for ever troubled by them. No 
matter where he went, he was tantalized, the path under- 
neath his feet a narrow dusty track of wilderness but all 
hung about with rich forbidden clusters of feminine fruit, 
shrinking, withering, vanishing at a touch. 

Turgis was by temperament a lover. His thoughts 
never left the other sex long; happiness had for him a 
feminine shape; the real world was illuminated by the 
bright glances of girls; and at any moment, one of them 
might reveal to him an enchanted life they could share to- 
gether. It would be easy to see him as a lonely lad seeking 
sympathy in that crowd in which he was lost. It would be 
just as easy to see him as a figure of furtive lusts, whose 
mind descended and there lived eagerly in an underworld 
of tiny mean contracts, seemingly accidental pressures of 
the arm and the foot. Yet behind both these figures was 
the lover. And this, in spite of his shabbii^ess and unpre- 
possessing looks, the shiny baggy suit and the frayed tie, 
the open mouth, that slight pastiness and spottiness, that 
faint grey film which seemed to cover and subdue his 
physical self. He was no dapper lady-killer. But then if 
Turgis, even within his scanty means, did not try very hard 
to make himself superficially attractive to the sex that 
despises crumpled clothes, matted hair, pasty cheeks, youth 
that has lost all vividness and glow, it was because he be- 
lieved that the cry from within, urgent, never ceasing, must 
receive an answer. He knew that he had little to offer on 
the surface, was nothing to look at, nobody in particular, 
but he felt that inside he was different, he was wonderful, 
and that sooner or later a girl, a beautiful and passionate 
girl, caring nothing for the outside show, would recognize 
this difference, this wonder, within, would cry, 'Oh, it 's 
you/ and love would immediately follow. Then life would 
really begin. So far it had not begun; in the tangle, 
blather, jumble of mere existence, of eating, sleeping, 
working, journeying, and staring, it had only made a 
number of false starts. In other words, Turgis had had 



122 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


his little adventures but was not yet in love, or rather 
— for he was perpetually in love — had not yet found the 
single outlet for all this flood, the one girl. 

After returning to his own desk, Turgis thought about 
these other girls who might so easily have come to work 
by his side instead of continuing with the Kwik-Work 
Razor Blade or Dunbury & Co., and then, dismissing them 
reluctantly, he began to tidy up his desk and finish off the 
week's work. It was after twelve, and the week-end was in 
sight. He leaned forward on his high stool, and breathed 
hard over communications from the London and North 
Eastern Railway and the City Transport Company. There 
was a girl at the City Transport — he had never seen her 
but she often answered the telephone — who sounded nice, 
lovely voice she had, and once or twice he had made her 
laugh. If he had been in the office by himself, he would 
have talked to her properly, perhaps suggested an appoint* 
ment — on the pictures they called it a 'date' but Turgis 
thought of it as a ‘point' — but he was never alone, and 
even if there was only that silly kid, Stanley, there, it would 
spoil it. But it was fine to hear her laugh down the tele- 
phone. Silvery, that was it — silvery laughter — her silvery 
laughter — just like in a book. 

He was interrupted by a touch on his arm, and he looked 
round to find the new typist at his elbow, looking up at 
him with her biggish brown eyes. She had a lot of powder 
on one side of her nose, and none at all, just shiny skin, on 
the other side. No good. 

'Please/ said Miss Sellers in her chirpy little Cockney 
voice, 'please, have you written to the Anglo- What 's-It 
Shipping?* 

'No, I haven't,* he replied. 

She merely stared. 

‘I haven't written to the Anglo-What*s-It Shipping/ he 
continued severely, ' because I 've never heard of the Anglo- 
What's-It Shipping. Don't know them — see?' 

‘Oo, I 'm sorry,' though she did not sound very sorry, 
'Have I said something wrong? I can't remember all 
these names yet. Give me a chance. You know who I 
mean, don't you? It is Anglo-something, isn't it? ' 

‘If it's the Anglo-Baltic Shipping Co. you're talking 
about/ said Turgis with dignity, ‘then I have written to 



TURGIS SEES HER 123 

them. Wrote yesterday, Vmatter of fact. But to the 
Anglo-Baltic, mind you. There ’ s no what*s-it about it.* 
The girl looked at him for a moment. 'Oo/ she cried 
softly, ‘squashed!* And then she promptly walked away. 

Turgis glanced after her with distaste. 'Getting cheeky 
now,* he told himself. ‘That ’s the latest — getting cheeky. 
And just because she can't make up to me. All right, Miss 
Dirty Fringe, you ’ll have to be told off soon, you will. Try 
it again, that ’s all, just try it again.* And he was filled 
with a righteous indignation, pointing out to himself that 
these girls didn’t know their place in an office, wouldn’t get 
on with their work properly, and were always trying their 
little tricks on men who wanted to do their job with no 
nonsense about it. 

There was a familiar scurrying, as of some small animal 
of the undergrowth that had got itself shod with leather 
and iron tips ; the door burst open ; Stanley h£d returned. 

'Come on, boy, come on,’ said Mr. Smeeth, Jooking over 
his eyeglasses. 'Get those letters copied, s|harp as y Q u 
can. Don’t want us to be here all day, wailing for you, 
do you?* 

‘ I want to get the one-five from London Bridge, if I can, 
Mr. Smeeth,* said Miss Matfield. 'I ’m spending the week- 
end in the country, thank God.’ 

‘You *11 get it all right, Miss Matfield,* Mr. Smeeth told 
her. 'Plenty of time. Now then, Stanley — bustle about. 
Sharp *s the word, my boy.* 

'Oo, Miss Matfield/ Miss Sellers began, staring at her 
‘d* you reely like the country this weather? I don’t know 
how you can bear it. I couldn’t, not now, when it ’ 
winter. It 's not as if it was summer, is it ? ’ 

'Like it best in winter, if it ’s not raining too hard. Jolly 
good! Nothing like so filthy as London is in winter.* 
'Well, I *m sure it would give me the ’ump,’ Miss Sellers 
declared. 'But I do like it in summer. It’s lovely in 
summer, I think.* You could almost see her looking at the 
buttercups and daisies. 'I like the seaside best, though, 
don’t you, Miss Matfield? It ’s lovely at the seaside in 
summer, I think. I *ve never been in winter. It *s nice 
in summer even when it rains at the seaside, isn ’t it ? ’ 

Miss Matfield replied, shortly but amiably, that it was, 
and then began clearing up her papers. 

*E93* 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


124 

'Here/ cried Stanley, in the middle of his copying, ‘I 
seen a smash right in Moorgate/ He looked round 
triumphantly. 

'I 'll bet you didn't/ said Turgis. 

‘ I did, and I bet you I did. Anyhow, if I didn't see it, 
I was there just after, when the bobby was taking names. 
Oh, what a crowd 1 I got right to the front. Car and a 
lorry it was. The lorry was all right, but you oughter seen 
the car. Oh, no, it wasn't a mess — oh, no!' 

4 And how many hours did you stand there, eh?' Mr. 
Smeeth inquired. 1 That 's what takes your time, my boy 
— doing your bit of nosy-parkering.' 

'I had to go that way and I couldn't get past, Mr. 
Smeeth,' Stanley cried indignantly. 'So I had to see what 
was up, couldn't help it. I thought the bobby might take 
my name as a witness, but he didn't. I wish he had done,' 
he added wistfully. 'I 'd like to be a witness.' 

'If you don't finish those letters in ten minutes,' said Mr. 
Smeeth, wagging a finger at him, 'you '11 be in the dock, 
and never mind being a witness. How are you getting on, 
Turgis?' 

'Nearly finished, Mr. Smeeth,' Turgis replied. ‘I'll 
just give the City Transport a ring to see it they 've heard 
anything about that lot we sent to Norwich.' And he 
promptly went to the telephone. 

There was no silvery laughter this time from the City 
Transport Company. The voice that answered him was 
not only a masculine voice, but also an irritated, badgered, 
weary, despairing voice, that of a man who was rapidly 
coming to the conclusion that he would be spending all 
Saturday afternoon answering idiotic inquiries. ‘Yes, I 
know, I know/ it barked. ‘You rang me up before about 
it. Well, we 're doing our best. We 've got the matter in 
hand. Yes, yes, yes, I 've told our Norwich people. I '11 
let you know on Monday. The first thing, the very first 
thing, on Monday, I '11 let you know.* It was pleading 
now. ‘Can't do more than that, can I ? ' And now it was 
tired of pleading. 'All right, all ri-ight, we 're doing what 
we ca-a-an. Ring you on Mo-o-onday.' 

'They 've got through to Norwich about it, Mr. Smeeth,' 
said Turgis, ‘but they say it'll have to stand over till 
Monday/ 



TURGIS SEES HER 


125 

‘That's all right then, Turgis. Give them a ring on 
Monday/ 

There was now a feeling throughout the office that all 
manner of things would have to stand over until Monday. 
This feeling was not confined to Twigg and Dersingham 
but could have been discovered operating upstairs at the 
Universal Hosiery Co. and the London and Counties Supply 
Stores , and downstairs at the Kwik-Work Razor Blade Co., 
and at Chase & Cohen : Carnival Novelties on the one side 
and at Dunbury & Co. : Incandescent Gas Fittings on the 
other side, in fact, all up and down Angel Pavement, and 
far beyond Angel Pavement, in all the banks and offices 
and showrooms and warehouses of the City. Very soon 
the City itself would be standing over until Monday: the 
crowds of brokers and cashiers and clerks and typists and 
hawkers would have vanished from its pavements, the bars 
would be forlorn, the teashops nearly empty or closed; its 
trams and buses, no longer clamouring for a few more yards 
of space, would come gliding easily through misty blue 
vacancies like ships going down London River; and the 
whole place, populated only by caretakers and policemen 
among the living, would sink slowly into quietness ; the very 
bank-rate would be forgotten; and it would be left to 
drown itself in reverie, with a drift of smoke and light fog 
across its old stones like the return of an army of ghosts. 
Until — with a clatter, a clang, a sudden raw awakening — 
Monday. 

Papers were swept into drawers, letters were stamped in 
rows, blotters were shut, turned over, put away, ledgers 
and petty-cash boxes were locked up, typewriters were 
covered, noses were powdered, cigarettes and pipes were lit, 
doors were banged, and stairs were noisy with hasty feet. 
The week was done. Out they came in their thousands 
into Angel Pavement, London Wall, Moorgate Street, 
Comhill, and Cheapside. They were so thick along Fins- 
bury Pavement that the Moorgate Tube Station seemed 
like a monster sucking them down into its hot rank inside. 
Among these vanishing mites was one with a large but not 
masterful nose, full brown eyes, a slightly open mouth, and 
a drooping chin. This was Turgis going home. 

He had to stand all the way, and though there were at 
least five nice-looking girls in the same compartment — and 



126 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


one was very close to him, and two of the others he had 
noticed several times before — not one of them showed the 
slightest interest in him. 


ii 

When Turgis returned again to the earth’s surface, he 
plunged at once into the noise and litter of High Street, 
Camden Town, and then turned up the Kentish Town Road, 
for he lodged in Nathaniel Street, which lies in that con- 
glomeration of short streets between the Kentish Town Road 
and York Road. He was rather later than usual, for this 
new Golspie business was having its effect even on Saturday 
morning, and so he walked quickly for once. He was ready 
for dinner and he knew that dinner would be ready for him. 
On Saturdays and Sundays, his landlady provided dinner 
as well as breakfast, and, indeed, was not averse to laying 
out a bit of tea, too, if that should be called for, Turgis 
having been with her now for eighteen months and having 
proved himself to be — by Nathaniel Street standards, 
which are based on a bitter knowledge of this world — a 
good quiet lodger, sober, and punctual in his payments. 
During the week, he had, officially, nothing but breakfast 
in the house, and had to shift for himself for his other meals, 
which followed a descending scale of luxury every fortnight, 
beginning with the alternate week-ends when he was paid. 
Thus, every other Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Turgis 
was well fed, and every other Wednesday, Thursday, Fri- 
day, he was comparatively half starved. At a pinch, how- 
ever, his landlady would always give him a little supper. 
They were all friendly together. They had to be, for they 
all used the same back room for meals. The bed-sitting- 
room that Turgis had at the top of the house, so small that 
the iron bedstead, the yellow washstand, the three deal 
drawers, the lopsided and groaning basket chair, and the 
little old gas-fire, a genuine antique among gas-fires, made 
it seem uncomfortably crowded with furniture and fittings, 
was no place in which to feed. It did not like being sat in, 
resented the sight of a cup of tea and a biscuit, and the 
presence of one good plateful of roast beef, potatoes, 
Brussels sprouts, and gravy, would have completely 
finished it. 



TURGIS SEES HER 127 

Number nine, like all the other houses in Nathaniel 
Street, was small and dark, and its gloomy little hall was 
haunted by a mixed smell of cabbage, camphor, and old 
newspapers. Turgis never noticed this smell, but on the 
very rare occasions when he visited some other and less 
odorous house, then he noticed the absence of it, his nose 
declaring at once that it had found itself in an unfamiliar 
atmosphere. Now he hung up his hat and coat and 
marched straight into the back room. There he discovered 
his landlady, who, having finished dinner, was enjoying a 
cup of tea by the fire. She was not enjoying this cup of 
tea, however, in an easy leisurely fashion; she was sitting, 
almost tense, on the very edge of the chair; and she had 
something of the air of a cavalry general between two 
phases of a battle. 

Mrs. Pelumpton had every right to such an air. She was 
a short and very broad woman, with a mop of untidy grey 
hair and a withered-apple face, and it was easiy to see that 
all her adult life had been one long struggle, anfid that unless 
she suffered a paralytic stroke or was driven oi*t of her wits, 
she would die fighting. In her presence, progress seemed 
the most absurd myth. If Mrs. Pelumpton cohid have been 
turned into the wife of a marauding Viking or one of the 
women following Attila’s horde, she would have felt she 
had been given a well-earned rest and would have been 
astonished at, perhaps horrified by, the sudden colour 
and gaiety of life. 

As soon as she saw Turgis she put down her cup and, as 
it were, jumped into the saddle again. She placed on the 
table two covered plates, her lodger's dinner, meat and 
vegetables under one cover, pudding under the other. 

‘I 'm a bit late to-day, Mrs. Pelumpton,' said Turgis, 
settling down. 

'Well, I said to myself you might have been or you might 
not, according to whether that clock 's gone and got fast 
again, and it might well have done that, the way he 's been 
playing about with it.’ 

‘About quarter of an hour fast, I make it — might be 
twenty minutes.' 

‘And that,' said Mrs. Pelumpton, very decisively, 'is 
what comes of messing about with it. “ Leave it alone/ 
I told him. “Clocks isn't in your line." Not that quarte 



128 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


of an hour 's going to hurt anybody in this house — except 
Edgar, and he 's got his own watch with proper railway 
time on it.' Edgar, her son, who also lived in the house, 
worked on the railway down at King's Cross. Turgis 
rarely saw him. 

‘That's a nice bit o' meat you're having there, Mr. 
Turgis, isn't it?' Mrs. Pelumpton continued, after taking 
a noisy sip of tea and then staring over the cup at him. 
'Chilled, that is. You'd have thought that was English 
if I hadn't told you, wouldn't you? ' 

'Yes, I would, Mrs. Pelumpton.' 

‘Well, I won't deceive you. It isn't. It 's chilled. And 
it all depends on the picking. Take what they offer, and 
you don't know where you are. You 've got to losak about 
a bit and pick it yourself. They know me now.' And here 
Mrs. Pelumpton produced a short triumphant laugh. ‘They 
know me all right. "Pick where you like, Ma," he always 
says to me. “Oh, I'll watch it," I tells him. “I'll 
watch it.'' And I do.' 

'That's the style. It's a very nice dinner, Mrs. 
Pelumpton.' 

A certain shuffling noise indicated that the master of the 
house, the messer-about with clocks, Mr. Pelumpton, was 
now approaching. Mr. Pelumpton moved very slowly, 
partly because he suffered from rheumatism, and partly 
because he was a man of great dignity. To look at him, at 
his slack and dingy figure, at his watery eyes, bottle nose, 
ragged and drooping grey moustache, to mark his leisurely 
air, was to imagine at once that Mr. Pelumpton was one 
of those men who do not work themselves but merely see 
that their wives and children work for them. But this was 
not the truth. Mr. Pelumpton did work, as his talk would 
quickly inform you. He was a dealer. He. had no shop 
of his own, but he had some vague connection with a shop, 
where an astonishing variety of second, third, or fourth 
hand goods were sold, owned by a friend of his. He passed 
his time in a dusty underworld in which battered chests of 
drawers and broken gramophones changed hands and the 
deals were in shillings and the commission in pence. He 
interviewed parties who had for sale a cracked toilet set or 
an old bicycle or five mildewed volumes of The Stately 
Homes of England . He could sometimes be found in the 



TURGIS SEES HER 129 

humblest auction rooms, ready to bid up to half a crown for 
the odds and ends. Every Friday he became a bona fide 
merchant by making an appearance in Caledonian Market, 
where, on that grey and windy height, he stood beside a 
small but very varied stock, consisting perhaps of a Banjo 
Tutor, two chipped pink vases, a silk under-skirt, a large 
photograph of General Buller, five dirty tennis balls, a zither 
with most of the strings missing, and the Letters of Charles 
Kingsley . Dealing thus in things that were only one re- 
move from the dustbin, Mr. Pelumpton did not contrive to 
make much money, and indeed he had been dependent for 
some time on Mrs. Pelumpton and Edgar; but, on the other 
hand, you could not say he did not work. He was in the 
second-hand trade, in the buying and selling line, a legiti- 
mate dealer, and took himself and his mysterious business 
with enormous seriousness. If he was not doing very well, 
that was because trade was so bad. Mr. Pelutnpt m had all 
the deliberation and dignity of an antique merchant prince. 
He smoked a foul little pipe, liked a glass of beer, was a 
great reader of newspapers, and always talked in a very 
solemn and confidential manner. Like many dealers and 
Caledonian Market men, who have drooping moustaches, 
very few teeth, and a confidential manner, he softened all 
the sibilants, putting an ‘ h * behind every * $/ There is n > 
doubt that a dealer who can only say ‘Yes' is not in such a 
strong position as the dealer who can draw it out into a 
mysterious ‘Yersh.' Mr. Pelumpton was essentially a 
‘ Yersh' man. 

He now advanced very slowly into the room, carefully 
seated himself by the fire, took out his evil little pipe, 
looked at Turgis in a watery fashion, nodded solemnly, 
put back his pipe, and waited for somebody to ask him 
something. 

‘Well, did you catch him in?' his wife inquired. Mr. 
Pelumpton was always having to slip round the corner to 
catch somebody in, even if he had only just finished his 
own dinner. 

‘Out till five/ replied Mr. Pelumpton. ‘And a shaushy 
ansher for me trouble/ 

‘Who 's bin giving you a saucy answer? ' 

‘ Hish mishish/ said Mr. Pelumpton, ‘if it ish hish mishish. 
“Can't expect to find 'im in on Shaturday arfternoon/' she 



130 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

shaysh to me. "You 'll excuse me, mishish," I told her, 
"but in my bishnish, you've got to work Shaturday 
arftemoon shame ash any other arfternoon. Yersh," I 
told her, "an' Shunday arftemoon too, if you 're not care- 
ful." Jusht telling her politely, shee? All right, what 
doesh she shay to that? She shaysh, "Well, we're 
diff'rent 'ere, shee?" and then shlamsh the door in me 
faysh.' 

'The cheeky monkey I ' cried Mrs. Pelumpton indignantly. 

‘ I 'd slam it in her face if I 'd anything to do with her. It 's 
downright ignorance, that 's what it is. There 's people 
round here has no more idea 'ow to behave than a — a — a 
parrot/ 

'Ar, well/ Mr. Pelumpton continued, philosophically, 
'we 've got a lot to put with in our bishnish. And you can 
take that from me, Mishter Turgish. But if the shtuff 'sh 
there, we don't mind. All in the day’sh work, shee?' 

* After something good, Mr. Pelumpton ? ' Turgis inquired. 

‘That'sh right. A lovely piesh he 'sh got to shell — a 
shideboard — oh, a lovely piesh, it ish — only wantsh a bit 
of polishing and it 'sh good enough for anybody, that piesh 
ish, fit for a palash. I can't 'andle it myshelf, not ash 
trade ish now, but I know who can. It 'sh a commission 
job.’ 

'That 's the idea,' said Turgis, with vague approval. 
He was a youth who liked to agree with his company, not 
because he felt kindly disposed towards other people but 
simply because it was less trouble to agree and applaud. 
He really thought Mr. Pelumpton a ridiculous old bore. 

'Now that 's one thing I 've always wanted,' cried Mrs. 
Pelumpton. 'A sideboard, a proper nice sideboard, 
cupboards and all, and room for everything. Mahogany, 
I'd like.' 

' Ar, that 'sh what a lot o' people would like. They 're 
fetching good money them thingsh are. Show me a good 
shideboard, a sholid piesh — not sho much of your shtuff 
about it, Mishter Turgish ' 

'What 's his stuff, for Heaven's sake?' Mrs. Pelumpton 
demanded. 4 He hasn 't got any stuff, have you, Mr, Turgis ? 
What you talking about, dad? \ 

Mr. Pelumpton took out his pipe for this, and looked very 
reproachfully at his wife. ' What am I talking about ? I 'm 



TURGIS SEES HER 131 

talking about what I know, that 'sh what I 'm talking 
about. 'Ow many pieshesh of furnisher have been through 
my handsh? Thoushandsh. All right then. Don't I 
know the trade? Ho, no! Ho, no! I don't know the 
trade.' Then he pointed his pipe at Turgis, who was very 
busy with his treacle pudding, and then said very slowly, 
very solemnly: ‘ Veneersh. You know what them are. 
Well, that 'sh hish shtuff. Am I right, Mishter Turgish?' 

'That 's right,' said Turgis. 'That 's what we sell at our 
place, Mrs. Pelumpton. Veneers for furniture, and inlays, 
and all that. 'S'matter of fact, I don't have anything to 
do with 'em personally, 'cos it isn't my particular job, but 
that 's what we sell all right.’ 

'Well, I never did!' Mrs. Pelumpton was filled with 
honest wonder at a world in which so many different things 
were bought and sold. * And I never knew that. Thought 
you was in an office, down in the City, y' know — a clurk/ 

'Sho he ish,' her husband assured her, 'but that 'sh what 
hish firm shellsh. He told me long shinsh, 1 . didn't you, 
Mishter Turgish? Well, ash I wash shayingj show me a 
good shideboard, a sholid piesh, and I '11 get you what you 
like for it — in reashon, in reashon, y' know. Trade may be 
bad. Trade ish bad. But for shome thingsh you 'ave a 
shteady demand, that 'sh what you 'ave— a shteady de- 
mand. Where we 're feeling it in our bishnish ish in the 

shmall thingsh ' Mr. Pelumpton was now settling 

down to a good long monologue, but he reckoned without 
his audience, both of whom knew these monologues too 
well. His wife, seeing that Turgis had finished, pounced 
upon his used plates and bore them off, with a bustle and 
clatter that brought a frown to her husband's face. He 
now tried to buttonhole Turgis, who was lighting a cigarette. 
‘Now you take me, Mishter Turgish,' he began. 

But Turgis refused to take him; he had taken him too 
often before; and now he promptly escaped upstairs, to his 
own room. It is difficult for a room to be both stuffy and 
cold, but this room contrived it somehow, and offered you 
the choice, if you chose to interfere with it, of being still 
stuffier or still colder. Turgis, who preferred stuffiness to 
cold, lit the gas-fire, that tiny antique, which so deeply 
resented being called into service again that it exploded 
with an indignant bang and then wheezily complained 



132 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

every other second. After the last breath of raw November 
had been driven out of the room, Turgis took off his collar 
and his shoes and stretched himself out on the bed. First, 
he read all the advertisements in his newspaper, which 
specialized on Saturdays in the mail-order business. There 
was a whole page of these advertisements, offering every- 
thing from Orientally perfumed cigarettes to electric belts 
for rheumatism, and Turgis carefully read them all. In 
public he pretended to be very knowing and cynical about 
advertisements, but in private he was still their willing 
victim, and nearly every shilling he spent, whether on 
clothes, drink, tobacco, or amusement, was conjured out 
of his pocket by the richest and most artful advertising 
managers. Perhaps that is why his suits bagged so soon, 
his shoes soaked up the rain, his cigarettes shredded and 
split, and his amusements failed to amuse. 

When he had done with the newspaper, he took from the 
mantelpiece (and he could do this without getting up from 
the bed) the latest issue of a twopenny periodical that was 
devoted to the films, though more especially to the film 
actors with the longest eyelashes and the actresses with the 
largest eyes. He spent the next half hour staring at the 
photographs in this paper and reading its scrappy para- 
graphs, not with any particular enthusiasm. Turgis was 
not really a film enthusiast. He knew nothing about 
camera angles and ‘ cutting ’ and all the intricacies of crowd 
work, and never in his life had he seriously compared one 
film with another. He could laugh at the comic men with 
the rest, but he did not fully appreciate the clowning on the 
screen, simply because he had not a very strong sense of 
humour. No, what drew him to the films was the fact that 
he and they had a common enthusiasm, they had both a 
passionate interest in sex. In those dim sensuous palaces, 
filled with throbbing music and shifting coloured lights, 
Turgis the lover entered his dream kingdom. You could 
say that the money he paid at their doors was silver tribute 
to Aphrodite, to whose worship the Phoenicians of the 
Californian coast have built more temples than ever the 
old Phoenicians of Cyprus did; and for a few moments, as 
he sat in the steep darkened galleries, Turgis would be 
shaken and then intoxicated by the golden presence of the 
goddess as she flashed through with her train, Eros and the 



TURGIS SEES HER 133 

Hours .and the Graces, though of all that retinue only two 
remained with him, to see iiim home, Pothos and Himeros, 
shapes of longing and yearning. 

The paper slipped from his fingers. His eyes closed; his 
jaw dropped a little; and his head turned on the pillow, so 
that the light of the gas-fire, now coming to life in the 
dwindling daylight, for the window was no brighter than a 
slate, played faintly but rosily on his features, the pleasant 
width of brow, the nose that had missed masterfulness, the 
round chin that fell away, and as his breathing grew more 
regular and he slipped into unconsciousness, that light 
brought something at once grotesque and sad, the red 
gleam and deep shadow of some Gothic tragedy, into the 
little room. And for an hour or so Turgis slept, while 
Saturday went rattling and roaring on, gathering momen- 
tum, through the dark little abysses of brick and smoke 
outside, the streets of London. 


in 

The Turgis who came out of 9 Nathaniel Street, later 
that Saturday afternoon, was quite different from the youth 
we have already met. He was washed, brushed, con- 
scientiously shaved, and he moved briskly. This was for 
him the best time of all the week. Saturday sang in his 
heart. If the Great Something ever happened, it would 
happen on Saturday. The trams, buses, shops, bars, 
theatres, and picture palaces, they all gleamed and glittered 
through the rich murk to-day for him. Even now, Ad- 
venture — in high heels and silk stockings — might be 
moving his way. He was making for the West End, for 
on Saturdays, especially the alternate Saturdays when he 
received his pay, he despised Camden Town and Islington 
and Finsbury Park, those little centres that broke the desert 
of North London with oases of flashing lights and places of 
entertainment. These were good enough in their way, but 
if you had a few shillings to spend, the West was a great 
deal better, offering you the real thing in giant teashops and 
picture theatres. For this was his usual Saturday night 
programme, if he had the money: first, tea at one of the big 
teashops, which were always crowded with girls and always 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


134 

offered a chance of a pick-up; then a visit to one of the 
great West End cinemas, in which, once inside, he could 
spin out the whole evening, perhaps on the edge of adven- 
ture all the time. And this was his programme for this 
night, too, though, of course, he was always ready to 
modify it if anything happened in the teashop, if he found 
the right sort of girl there and she wanted to do something 
else. 

At the very time he was setting out, hundreds and 
hundreds of girls, girls with little powdered snub noses* wet 
crimson mouths, shrill voices, and gleaming calves, were 
also setting out — nearly all of them, unfortunately, in pairs 
— to carry out the very same programme. Turgis knew 
this, or perhaps only a hunters instinct led him to where 
the game were thickest; but he did not visualize them, 
luckily for him, for the tantalizing image would have driven 
him nearly to madness. But there they were, tripping 
down innumerable dark steps, chirping and laughing to- 
gether in buses and trams without end, and making for the 
same small area, the very same buildings, perhaps to jostle 
him as they passed. It would have been easier for Turgis, 
as he knew only too well, if he too had had a companion, to 
match all these pairs of girls, but he had only a few ac- 
quaintances, no friends, and, in any event, he preferred to 
hunt in solitude, to thread his way through the brilliant 
jungle alone with his hunger and his dream. 

A bus took him to the West End, where, among the 
crazy coloured fountains of illumination, shattering the 
blue dusk with green and crimson fire, he found the cafe 
of his choice, a teashop that had gone mad and turned 
Babylonian, a white palace with ten thousand lights. It 
towered above the older buildings like a citadel, which 
indeed it was, the outpost of a new age, perhaps a new 
civilization, perhaps a new barbarism; and behind the thin 
marble front were concrete and steel, just as behind the 
careless profusion of luxury were millions of pence, balanced 
to the last halfpenny. Somewhere in the background, 
hidden away, behind the ten thousand lights and acres of 
white napery and bewildering glittering rows of teapots, 
behind the thousand waitresses and cash-box girls and 
black-coated floor managers and temperamental long- 
haired violinists, behind the mounds of shimmering bon- 



TURGIS SEES HER 


135 

bons and multi-coloured Viennese pastries, the cauldrons 
of stewed steak, the vanloads of harlequin ices, were a few 
men who went to work juggling with fractions of a farthing, 
who knew how many units of electricity it took to finish a 
steak-and-kidney pudding and how many minutes and 
seconds a waitress (five feet four in height and in average 
health) would need to carry a tray of given weight from the 
kitchen lift to the table in the far corner. In short, there 
was a warm, sensuous, vulgar life flowering in the upper 
stories, and cold science working in the basement. Such 
was the gigantic teashop into which Turgis marched, in 
search not of mere refreshment but of all the enchantment 
of unfamiliar luxury. Perhaps he knew in his heart that 
men have conquered half the known world, looted whole 
kingdoms, and never arrived at such luxur^. The place 
was built for him. 

It was built for a great many other people too, and, as 
usual, they were all there. It steamed wi^h humanity. 
The marble entrance hall, piled dizzily with;bonbons and 
cakes, was as crowded and bustling as a railway station. 
The gloom and grime of the streets, the raw air, all No- 
vember, were at once left behind, forgotten : the atmosphere 
inside was golden, tropical, belonging to some high mid- 
summer of confectionery. Disdaining the lifts, Turgis, 
once more excited by the sight, sound, and smell of it all, 
climbed the wide staircase until he reached his favourite 
floor, where an orchestra, led by a young Jewish violinist 
with wandering lustrous eyes and a passion for tremolo 
effects, acted as a magnet to a thousand girls. The door 
was swung open for him by a page; there burst, like a 
sugary bomb, the clatter of cups, the shrill chatter of white- 
and-vermilion girls, and, cleaving the golden, scented air, 
the sensuous clamour of the strings; and, as he stood 
hesitating a moment, half dazed, there came, bowing, a 
sleek grave man, older than he was and far more dis- 
tinguished than he could ever hope to be, who murmured 
deferentially: 'For one, sir? This way, please/ Shyly, 
yet proudly, Turgis followed him. 

That was the snag really, though. This place was sc 
crowded that you had to take the seat they offered you; 
there was no picking and choosing your company at the 
table. And, as usual, Turgis was not lucky. The vacant 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


136 

seat he was shown, and which he dare not refuse, was at a 
table already occupied by three people, and not one of them 
remotely resembled a nice-looking girl. There were two 
stout middle-aged women, voluble, perspiring, and happy 
over cream buns, and a middle-aged man, who no doubt had 
been of no great size even before this expedition started but 
was now very small and huddled, and gave the impression 
that if the party stayed there much longer, he would shrink 
to nothing but spectacles, a nose, a collar, and a pair of 
boots. For the first few minutes, Turgis was so disap- 
pointed that he was quite angry with these people, hated 
them. And of course it was impossible to get hold of a 
waitress. After five minutes or so of glaring and waiting, 
he began to wish he had gone somewhere else. There was 
a pretty girl at the next table, but she was obviously with 
her young man, and so fond of him that every now and then 
she clutched his arm and held it tight, just as if the young 
man might be thinking of running away. At another 
table, not far away, were three girls together, two of whom 
looked very interesting, with saucy eyes and wide smiling 
mouths, but they were too busy whispering and giggling to 
take any notice of him. So Turgis suddenly stopped being 
a bright youth, shooting amorous glances, and became a 
stem youth who wanted some tea, who had gone there for 
no other purpose than to obtain some tea, who was sur- 
prised and indignant because no tea was forthcoming. 

'And mindjew,' cried one of the middle-aged women to 
the other, * I don't bear malice 'cos it isn't in my nature, as 
you 'll be the first to agree, my dear. But when she let 
fly with that, I thought to meself, “ All right, my lady, now 
this time you 've gone a bit too far. It 's my turn." But 
mindjew, even then I didn't say what I could have said. 
Not one word about Gravesend crossed my lips to her, 
though it was there on the tip of my tongue.' 

Turgis looked at her with disgust. Silly old geezer I 

At last the waitress came. She was a girl with a nose so 
long and so thickly powdered that a great deal of it looked 
as if it did not belong to her, and she was tired, exasperated, 
and ready at any moment to be snappy. She took the 
order — and it was for plaice and chips, tea, bread and 
butter, and cakes: the great tea of the whole fortnight — 
without any enthusiasm, but she returned in time to prevent 



TURGIS SEES HER 


137 

Turgis from losing any more temper. For the next twenty 
minutes, happily engaged in grappling with this feast, he 
forgot all about girls, and when the food was done and h< 
was lingering over his third cup of tea and a cigarette, 
though no possible girls came within sight, he felt dreamily 
content. His mind swayed vaguely to the tune the 
orchestra was playing. Adventure would come; and for 
the moment he was at ease, lingering on its threshold. 

From this tropical plateau of tea and cakes, he descended 
into the street, where the harsh night air suddenly smote 
him. The pavements were all eyes and thick jostling 
bodies; at every comer, the newspaper sellers cried out their 
football editions in wailing voices of the doomed ; cars went 
grinding and snarling and roaring past; and the illu- 
minated signs glittered and rocketed beneath the forgotten 
faded stars. He arrived at his second destination, the 
Sovereign Picture Theatre, which towered at the corner 
like a vast spangled wedding-cake in stone. It might have 
been a twin of that great teashop he had just left; and 
indeed it was; another frontier outpost of the new age. 
Two Jews, bom in Poland but now American citizens, had 
talked over cigars and coffee on the loggia of a crazy 
Spanish-Italian-American villa, within sight of the Pacific, 
and out of that talk (a very quiet talk, for one of the two 
men was in considerable pain and knew that he was dying 
inch by inch) there had sprouted this monster, together 
with other monsters that had suddenly appeared in New 
York, Paris, and Berlin. Across ten thousand miles, those 
two men had seen the one-and-sixpence in Turgis's pocket 
and, with a swift gesture, resolving itself magically into 
steel and concrete and carpets and velvet-covered seats 
and pay-boxes, had set it in motion and diverted it to 
themselves. 

He waited now to pay his one-and-sixpence, standing in 
the queue at the balcony entrance. It was only a little 
after six and the Saturday night rush had hardly begun, 
but soon there were at least a hundred of them standing 
there. Near Turgis, on either side, the sexes were neatly 
paired off. There were one or two middle-aged women but 
no unaccompanied girl in sight in the whole queue. The 
evening was not beginning too well. 

When at last they were admitted, they first walked 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


138 

through an enormous entrance hall, richly tricked out in 
chocolate and gold, illuminated by a huge central cande- 
labra, a vast bunch of russet gold globes. Footmen in 
chocolate and gold waved them towards the two great 
marble balustrades, the wide staircase lit with more russet 
gold globes, the prodigiously thick and opulent chocolate 
carpets, into which their feet sank as if they were the feet of 
archdukes and duchesses. Up they went, passing a choco- 
late and gold platoon or two and a portrait gallery of film 
stars, whose eyelashes seemed to stand out from the walls 
like stout black wires, until they reached a door that led 
them to the dim summit of the balcony, which fell dizzily 
away in a scree of little heads. It was an interval between 
pictures. Several searchlights were focused on an organ- 
keyboard that looked like a tiny gilded box, far below, and 
the organ itself was shaking out cascades of treacly sound, 
so that the whole place trembled with sugary ecstasies. But 
while they waited in the gangway, the lights faded out, the 
gilded box dimmed and sank, the curtains parted to reveal 
the screen again, and an enormous voice, as inhuman as 
that of a genie, announced that it would bring the world’s 
news not only to their eyes but to their ears. 

'One? This way, sir,’ and the attendant went down 
flashing his light. This was always an exciting moment 
for Turgis. He might find himself next to some wonderful 
girl, as lonely as he was, who would talk to him, squeeze his 
hand, let him take her home, and kiss him in the darkness 
of some mysterious suburb. The great adventure might 
begin at the end of that pointing pencil of light. On the 
other hand, he might find himself miserably wedged in 
between two fat middle-aged people. It was all a gamble, 
with the odds heavily against the wonderful girl, as he 
knew too well. But still, there was always a chance, and 
he never walked down these dark steps behind the electric 
torch without feeling a mounting excitement. 

The light pointed along a row, and he followed it, pushing 
past a dozen indignant knees. The last pair was very 
stubborn, and he negotiated them without enthusiasm. He 
h$id no luck. Here, on one side of him was the owner of the 
knees, an enormous woman, bulging over her seat, and on 
the other was a man with a beard and a noisy pipe. And 
it was too late to change his place now. Once again the 



TURGIS SEES HER 139 

miracle had not happened. Gloomily he turned his atten- 
tion to the news film, and not one single inch or roar of it 
entertained him. It was followed by a comedy, all about 
a lot of silly kids, and he sat there, steadily hating it. He 
also hated the enormous woman, who laughed so much 
that great lumps of her hit him on the shoulder. He 
decided, miserably, that he ought not to have come to the 
Sovereign. Next time he would give the Sovereign a miss. 
Stiff with fat women and men with stinking pipes, that *s 
what it was — oh, cripes! — awful hole! And another 
Saturday night going, gone! 

Then came the film of the evening, the star feature, and 
Turgis soon began to take an interest in it and found 
himself lifted out of his gloom. It was a talkie called The 
Glad- Rag Way , and it was all about a beautiful girl (and 
she was beautiful, for she was Lulu Castellar, one of his 
favourites) who went to New York to dance in cabarets 
and for a time forgot all about her sweetheart, $ poor young 
inventor who lived in the most dismal lodgings^ like Turgis, 
but, unlike Turgis, also contrived to have his hair ex- 
quisitely waved at regular intervals. This beautiful girl 
behaved in the most foolish way. She accepted presents 
from rich men with ugly leering mouths; she went out to 
supper with them and got tipsy, as well die might, for 
the whole atmosphere consisted sometimes of champagne 
bubbles; she attended parties, very late at night, in their 
flats, and though the rooms in these flats were three hundred 
feet long and two hundred feet broad, the parties them- 
selves were undoubtedly intimate affairs, at which a girl 
was able to express herself by dancing on the table and 
throwing off some of her clothes. Everything this girl 
wore, every movement she made, only called the attention 
of these leering fellows to some part of her ravishing figure ; 
and even when she herself had stopped making eyes and 
smiling at them and undulating round them, with a 
champagne glass in her hand, her charming legs still 
insisted on claiming their notice. It was obvious that at 
any moment these rich cads would make their old mistake, 
they would assume that she was not a virtuous girl and 
would act accordingly, to her astonishment and indignation 
and shame at being so misunderstood, so treated. Mean- 
while, the young inventor had received a letter (and you 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


140 

heard him tear it open) asking him to come to New York to 
meet three heavy men who had just been barking at one 
another about him in the previous scene. It was, as he 
himself admitted, his 'beeg chaince.' 

His train was still roaring across the screen when Turgis, 
whose interest had been thoroughly roused, heard a voice 
say, "Scuse me,' and saw a dim feminine shape that was 
obviously trying to get past. 

' 'S 'quite all right,' he said affably, withdrawing his knees 
to let her pass. 

She dropped into the seat on his left, taking the place of 
the man with the foul pipe, who must have crept out, to- 
wards the other gangway, without Turgis noticing him. 
This girl who had just arrived was still only a dim shape, 
but he felt sure she was young and pretty. 

"Scuse me,' she whispered again, 'but is this the big 
picture?' 

' Yes, it is,' he replied eagerly. 

1 Has it been on long ? ’ 

‘ No, not so long. It isn't half through yet, I 'm sure,' he 
told her, trying to talk as if he were a confidential old friend. 
‘I '11 bet the best 's coming on.' 

'Well, I hope you 're right,' she said, settling herself in 
the rather narrow seat and then giving her attention to the 
screen. 

A faint sweet whiff of scent had come his way. His 
senses did not wait for any more evidence; they reported 
at once to his imagination, which immediately dowered the 
vague dark figure beside him with all sweetness and pretti- 
ness, not unlike that of Lulu Castellar, who was at the 
moment absent from the screen, the young inventor, 
having arrived in New York, being barked at by the three 
heavy men. Turgis took in all that the film had to offer 
him, but now he was no longer lost in it; he was living 
intensively in the tiny darkened space between him and 
the girl. Instinctively, he edged a little her way. Their 
elbows touched on the arm of the seat, and even that 
trifling contact sent a thrill through him. A little later, his 
left leg encountered something at once firm and soft, 
another leg, a beautifully rounded feminine leg, and the 
two remained in contact. This, like the other, may have 
been casual, but to Turgis the effect was electric. And 



TURGIS SEES HER 141 

then it chanced that his hand, hanging loose by his side, 
touched another hand, which was not withdrawn when it 
was touched again, this time deliberately. The two hands 
now met fairly; they grasped one another, squeezed; their 
fingers were intertwined; they sent and received messages 
in the dark. Turgis could now regard the graceful antics 
of Lulu Castellar with a benevolent detachment. The 
dream life of the screen was nothing compared with the 
pulsating real life of those contacts in the warm gloom, 
those little pressures and squeezes that were signals from 
that other enchanted world. He did not try to talk to her 
again. That would come later. He said nothing, hardly 
looked her way, afraid lest he should break the spell. 

When the film ended and a kind of soft russet dawn broke 
as the screen disappeared behind the curtains, they moved 
away from one another, and he did not even catch a glimpse 
of her face. A great many people went out, and a great 
many others came in, but they were not disturbed. Then 
the curtains moved again ; a soft russet twilight came, only 
to fade into darkness; and the programme artfully con- 
tinued. But would this other and far more exciting 
programme continue ? His heart bounded in the new dark- 
ness. He leaned towards her again; she did not evade 
him; and hand clasped hand again, stickily perhaps now 
but still exquisitely, thrillingly. Turgis had not been so 
happy for months. 

It was not until the young inventor’s train to New York 
was again roaring across the screen, after the programme 
had gone round its full circle, that the girl loosened her hand 
and began to put on her gloves. Turgis had been waiting 
for this moment for some time. When she rose, he rose 
too; and she followed him past the indignant knees and 
up the stairs. It was when they reached the exit steps, 
descending into the real world, that he turned and spoke to 
her. And he knew instinctively that they were not now 
the two people who had been holding hands for so long in 
the darkness inside ; those two intimates were ghosts now ; 
these two on the steps, in the light, were strangers and 
would have to begin over again. When he spoke he acted 
upon this instinctive or intuitive knowledge. 

' How did you like the picture then ? ' he asked casually. 

'I didn't think it was so very good,' she replied, just as 



142 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


casually. 'I don’t like that Lulu Castellar. Pulls herself 
about a bit too much, she does, if you ask me. Might as 
well have Saint Vitus dance and have done with it. Do 
you like her?' 

'Oh--I dunno — she 's all right/ he muttered. He was 
recovering from a horrible shock. This girl was not pretty 
at all, not even reasonably good-looking. She was years 
older than he was, and she was hideous. He had just 
caught sight of her face properly for the first time. Her 
nose was all twisted and she had a bit of a squint. She 
was thirty if she was a day. Oh, hell — what a wash-out 1 
She was still talking, but he could not bother listening 
to what she was saying. Sheer vexation made his eyes 
smart. He kept pace with her down the steps, mumbling 
an occasional 'Yes' and ‘No/ but somewhere inside him 
was a hot little angry man who screamed and cursed at 
everything. 

'Well/ she said, when they reached the bottom door, 

‘ I 've got my sister to meet, so I '11 say good night to you.' 

'Good night/ said Turgis miserably. 

Saturday night was roaring away outside, but for him 
the heart had gone out of it. He walked on mechanically, 
so sorry for himself, so angry with everything, that he 
could have cried. His head ached from being in that 
rotten balcony so long. There were queer aches in his body 
too. Where could he go now? Nowhere worth going to. 

I f you had plenty of money, evening dress and ail that, you 
could go to restaurants and night clubs, and dance with 
beautiful girls with fine bare arms. But he wasn't in that 
seam. He 'd no evening dress; no money; and anyhow he 
couldn't dance. He couldn't do anything. No, perhaps 
he couldn't, but he was as good as most of those fat rotten 
blighters who had the money, who just went chucking it 
away while he had to count every penny. Look at that lot 
in the big car, with their fur coats and diamonds and white 
shirt fronts, probably going somewhere to dance and get 
boozed up and God knows what before they 'd finished! 
Swine I He was as good as them any day. And better — 
he did do some work. What did they do? It was enough 
to make any chap turn Bolshie. He didn't like the other 
chap who lodged at Mrs. Pelumpton's very much ; Park was 
a dreary, unfriendly sort of devil, and a Sheeny at that; but 



TURGIS SEES HER 


143 

he didn't blame Park for turning Bolshie. For two pins, 
he 'd turn Bolshie too. Yes, but what was the good of 
that? 

All this time he had been walking on and on, through a 
Saturday night with the bottom dropped out of it, and now 
had left the spangled West End behind him. He stopped 
at a coffee stall, where several fools were arguing about 
nothing as usual, and had two buns and a cup of coffee — 
poor stuff it was too, too sweet and nearly cold. As he 
turned his back to the counter, he saw a girl, a really nice 
kid with a red hat and big dark eyes, smiling in his direction, 
and he smiled back at her hopefully, but then he saw her 
eyes move slighly and the smile instantly vanish. She had 
not been looking at him before, when she smiled; she had 
been looking at the chap standing next to h|m, who was 
ordering two coffees. And what a chap to be out with, to 
be smiling at! If that 's what she wanted, she could have 
him. One vast sneer, Turgis moved away, an<J boarded the 
first bus he found that would take him to Capiden Town, 
back to Nathaniel Street with the ruins of his evening. 

‘ 'Ad a good time, boy ? ' said Mr. Pelumpton; now mellow 
with beer, as Turgis looked into the back room. ‘That 'sh 
the way. Yersh. Enjoy yershelf while you 're young, I 
shay, and while you can enjoy yershelf. I did when I wash 
your age an' don't ferget it, boy.' Here Mr. Pelumpton 
chuckled and then coughed. ‘I 'ad a good time and 
nobody could shtop me 'aving one.' 

‘What 's this about you and your good times?' said his 
wife, popping out from nowhere. 

'I 'm jusht telling our friend 'ere that I don't blame him 
for enjoying himshelf while he 'sh young, 'cosh I did the 
shame thing when I was young.' 

' Ar, you was a wicked devil you was,' said Mrs. Pelump- 
ton, with reluctant admiration. 

‘Oh, dear, oh, dear!' Mr. Pelumpton chuckled. 'Lishen 
to that. Ar well, boy, I don't blame yer. Good old 
Shaturday night. I 've 'ad 'em. I know.' 

‘I '11 bet you never had, you silly old fathead,’ Turgis 
muttered under his breath. 

'Only jusht remember thish, boy. Don'd overdo it, 
that 'sh all. Don'd overdo it. You 're only young wunsh. 
Enjoy yershelf, if yer like, but don'd overdo it.' 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


144 

Turgis looked at him in disgust. ‘Good night all/ he 
said, mournfully, and climbed the chilling stairs to his room. 
So much for Saturday. 


IV 

Sunday was fine, that is, there was no rain, sleet, or 
snow falling. There was also very little sunlight falling, 
and the streets of Camden Town and Kentish Town were 
like echoing slaty tunnels. Turgis saw them when he went 
out to buy a paper and a packet of cigarettes, and as usual 
he disliked the look of them. They were not very cheerful 
on a weekday, but they were a pantomime and a beanfeast 
then compared to what they were on Sunday. It was on 
Sunday that Turgis felt his loneliness most keenly. 

It must be admitted, though, that on this particular 
Sunday morning he had received and refused two invita- 
tions. The first was from Mr. Pelumpton, who had decided 
that he must pay a visit to Petticoat Lane — ‘jusht to shee 
'ow the shtuff's goin',' he said, with an impressive pro- 
fessional air. He had suggested, with some condescension, 
that Turgis might like to go with him. Turgis had 
promptly declined. He had been to Petticoat Lane before, 
and he saw quite enough of old Pelumpton in Nathaniel 
Street and had no desire to go to Whitechapel with him, 
merely to provide him with a listener and some free beer. 

The other invitation came from his fellow lodger, Park, 
the Bolshie. Park, a neat dark Jewy sort of chap, quiet 
and civil enough but with something machine-like and 
vaguely menacing about him, just as if he was not quite 
human, worked in the printing trade and apparently had 
to go at all hours, so that Turgis hardly ever saw him. 
Moreover, he was a tremendous communist worker, for ever 
attending meetings and conferences and addressing enve- 
lopes to distant comrades and circulating what seemed to 
Turgis, who had inspected it, some terribly dreary literature. 
The two young men did not like each other very much, but 
Park always saw in Turgis, who had the depressed look 
of a faintly class-conscious proletarian, a possible convert. 
Hence the invitation, which this time was for some com- 
munist affair, a meeting or two and coffee and cake for the 



TURGIS SEES HER 


145 

comrades, somewhere out at Stratford or West Ham. 
Turgis turned it down, though not ungraciously, for though 
he did not care much for Park, he had a vague kind of 
respect for him. But he did not see himself with the 
comrades. Perhaps the real reason was that he could not 
imagine any girls, real nice girls, not glaring female com- 
rades, in the picture. He did not tell Park so, did not even 
admit it to himself ; and when Park, with the drab innocence 
of his kind, accused him of being a timid slave of the 
bourgeois classes, a would-be bourgeois himself, he had 
no defence but a grin and a jeering noise. 

The paper kept him amused until dinner time. After 
dinner he went for a walk, which chiefly consisted of penny 
bus rides. They finally landed him, as they had landed a 
few thousand other people, at the Marble Arch corner of 
Hyde Park, where the Sunday orators congregate. Turgis 
often visited this forum and listened to the orators. He 
had no intellectual curiosity and never really attended to 
the arguments, such as they were, but he had a sort of 
genial contempt for the speakers that was & warming, 
comforting feeling. He felt that they were a great deal 
sillier than he was, and that was pleasant. Moreover, any 
leisurely crowd always had an attraction for him, because 
there was always a chance that there might be, somewhere 
in the middle of it, bored and lonely, a wonderful girl who 
would suddenly smile back at him. 

He drifted from speaker to speaker with the crowd, 
which was largely composed of youths like himself, all 
feeling pleasantly superior, with a sprinkling of aggressive 
dialecticians and religious and political fanatics. There 
was a fantastic old man in a greenish frock coat who banged 
a large chart and talked in a high sing-song that left five 
words out of six quite unintelligible. His subject — of all 
things — was shorthand. Turgis stared at him for a minute 
or two, concluded that he was mad, and moved on. The 
next meeting, a large one, was political, and the only words 
Turgis caught — * What about Russia, where your socialism, 
my friends, has been put into practice? '—drove him away 
at once. Then there was a tiny group of people round a 
harmonium, played by a young man with bulging eyes and 
a straggling beard. They were drearily singing a hymn, 
and nobody was taking any notice of them. Next to them, 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


146 

one of those involved discussions, typical of the place, was 
in heated progress, and the audience, in its own ironical 
fashion, was enjoying it All that Turgis, at the back, 
could hear was the speaker himself, a young man with 
spectacles and long yellow hair who had something to do 
with the Catholic Church, who kept crying: 1 One mewment, 
my friend, just one mewment! Kindly allow me to speak. 
Yes, yes, but one mewment! You have asked me if I 
would considah such a person insane. Now, one mew- 
ment !' Turgis lingered for some time at this meeting. 
There were one or two nice girls in the crowd, but not one 
of them was by herself. It was no good. He would have 
to find a pal. 

The speaker on the right was being heckled by a woman 
who looked rather like Mrs. Pelumpton. He was an 
elderly man, dressed in an old-fashioned black suit, and he 
was shaking a Bible almost in her face. 4 Well, what do Ah 
do?' he cried, his eyes gleaming. 4 Ah turn once mo-ore 
to the graa-aate boo-ook. Yes, Ah 've a bahble text for 
tha-at.* Turgis did not learn what the text was, for there 
came a tremendous bellow from this man's neighbour, a 
dirty little fellow with a broad flat nose and an indiarubber 
mouth, who looked like a nasty compromise between 
Hoxton and Manchuria. 4 What is thee yighest idee-al of 
thee yole universe, my friends?' he was screaming, in a 
lather of oratory. 4 1 '11 tell you. Thee yighest idee-al of 
thee yole universe is Man — Man.' And he thumped him- 
self on the chest. Turgis did not like the look of him at all. 
He also did not like the look of the Salvation Army lasses 
who were conducting the service on the other side. They 
were all so pimply. They looked as if they were always 
eating things that disagreed with them. 

Next to the Army was a bony, shabby chap, a Bolshie, 
possibly one of Park's pals. Turgis had heard him before, 
and only stayed long enough to make sure that he was 
on the same tack. He was. 4 Noo where did communism 
firrst appearr, my frien's?' he was asking. 'Noat in 
Russia — oh, no! Noat in England — oh, no! Noat in 
Frrance — oh, no! Bu' in Grreece, my frien's, in ancient 
Greece, where a mon called Play to wrote a buik called The 
Republic . Yes, Ah know that this mon should rightly be 
called Plarto, but if Ah said Plarto, Ah know everybody 



TURGIS SEES HER 


147 

would be staringat me an* wondering who this Plarto was, 
so Ah call him Playto. An' he was the firrst communist. 1 
It was like listening to a Scots comedian who had gone sour. 
Turgis moved on, passing with the merest glance a very 
tiny group that everybody had ignored. There were three 
of them, two bearded and bare-headed men and a faded 
woman, and they were standing close together, apparently 
praying. Nobody was taking any notice of them, except a 
battered and boozy old actor (he recited a sort of story that 
introduced the names of all the successful plays running at 
the time, and Turgis knew him of old) who was waiting to 
claim the pitch. Why did these people come here? Who 
were they? What did they do at home? Once more, 
Turgis concluded they were all mad, but this time the 
thought did not give him any pleasant feeling of superiority. 
It depressed him. Suppose he was suddenly taken that 
way! 

But there were roars of laughter coming from the crowd 
on the right, and above it Turgis recognized another 
familiar figure, an atheist chap, and quite a turn too. He 
was a fat young man, with a glittering squint and a nose so 
resolutely turned up that it could be described as a snout; 
and he had a very self-confident perky manner and a shrill 
voice. Turgis edged himself into the audience. 'Now, 
where was Oi? Losing me plice, wasn't Oi?' he cried 
humorously. 'Ow, Oi know. Fish on Froiday, thet was 
it. Whoi dew the Catholics eat fish on Froiday? They 
down't know. They down't — strite! Yew arsk 'em an' 
see. They down't know. But Oi know.' Here the 
crowd roared its approval. ' It 's in nonner of the old god- 
dess, Froiyer, goddess of plenty. Froiyer — Froiday — see? 
Thet 's whoi they eat fish on Froiday. It is — strite.' The 
crowd roared again. 'Then there 's the Trinity. What 's 
thet? Yew arsk 'em. They down’t know. They 're not 
allowed to talk about it. Whoi? Tew sycred. That's 
what they '11 tell you — tew sycred. Secret and sycred — 
come from the sime root — mean the sime thing. They do — 
strite! ' His audience did not care very much if secret and 
sacred did come from the same root, but it thoroughly ap- 
proved of the piggy young man. And Turgis shared the 
general delight. 

By the time he had returned down the line of speakers 

F93* 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


148 

to the place where the old shorthand enthusiast had been 
(his pitch had been taken by a Christadelphian evangelist, 
a burly red-faced fellow who looked like a bookie), it was 
nearly dark and he found himself thinking about tea. He 
left the park, and walked along Oxford Street. Every 
teashop he came to was crammed. People were eating and 
drinking almost in one another's laps. And already there 
were queues for the pictures. 'If they Ve got homes to go 
to/ Turgis told himself, ‘why don't they go to 'em? ' He 
was sick of them. They were no good to him, these jumbles 
of faces. Finally, in somewhat low spirits, he found a 
place just off Oxford Street, one of those humble teashops 
with tall urns or geysers on the counter, a slatternly girl in 
attendance, a taxi-driver or two sitting at the first table 
and three Italians sitting at the back. He had a poor tea 
and it cost him fourpence-halfpenny more than he thought 
it would. When he went out again, it was drizzling, and 
miserably cold and damp. The queues for the pictures 
were enormous. All the cheaper seats were probably filled 
for the night. 

He crossed Oxford Street, and, without thinking where 
he was going, cut into the streets to the north of it. In one 
of these, a number of people, mostly women, were hurrying 
up some lighted steps. A notice informed him that the 
Higher Thought Alliance, London Circle, was meeting in 
that hall, to hear a lecture by Mr. Frank Dadds of Los 
Angeles, and that admission was free and that all would 
be heartily welcome. He lingered on the steps, where he 
was sheltered from the thickening drizzle, and wondered 
whether to go in or not. Now and again, on Sundays, he 
looked in at various services and meetings (though he had 
never tried the Higher Thought Alliance before, and had 
never heard of it), partly for want of something better to do, 
and partly because he always hoped he might strike up an 
acquaintance with a girl there, perhaps share the same 
hymn-book or programme. As he was hesitating, a large 
middle-aged woman in a fur coat, who had been fussing 
about in the entrance, noticed him and said: ‘Do come 
inside. Everybody is welcome/ So he shook the rain- 
drops from his overcoat, clutched at his hat, and, shyly, 
awkwardly, with his mouth wide open, he entered the 
hall. There, of course, before he had time to look round 



TURGIS SEES HER 149 

and see if there were any vacant seats near any nice-looking 
girls, an officious little man insisted on showing him to a 
seat. There were only about four men in the hall, but 
about two or three hundred women, mostly middle-aged 
and very dull. His own uncomfortable cane chair was 
between two of the dullest. On the platform, two women 
with short grey hair and a strained, gulping sort of ex- 
pression, played the violin and the piano, and went on 
playing for the next ten minutes. Turgis began to feel 
sorry he had come, even though the place was warm and 
dry and the affair would not cost him anything. 

Then the middle-aged woman in the fur coat, who had 
spoken to him outside, mounted the platform, and an- 
nounced that they would begin with a hymn. It was not 
an ordinary sort of hymn — even Turgis could see that — and 
unfortunately nobody seemed to know the tune. Even 
the violinist had some difficulty in arriving; at it. When 
the hymn finally trailed away into silence, they all remained 
standing, and then the woman in the fur coat said: *We 
affirm health, which is man's divine inheritance. Man's 
body is his holy temple,' and everybody else, except Turgis, 
looked down at slips of paper and repeated it after her: 
‘ We affirm health, which is man's divine inheritance. Man's 
body is his holy temple.' Several of the people near Turgis 
had some trouble in affirming this, because they were inter- 
rupted by fits of coughing, but they did their best. After 
that, they affirmed all sorts of things, divine love and power 
and truth and a general sort of oneness in the universe. 
Then they sat down, and nothing happened for a minute 
or two, during which time the universe had an opportunity 
of taking stock of their attitude towards it. Turgis was 
bewildered and not too happy, for the chair was very un- 
comfortable and his feet were cold. 

He did not listen to what the woman in the fur coat said 
when she began talking again. She seemed to be reading a 
poem by a friend of hers, and then leaving a thought with 
with them all. Turgis heard this remark because she 
repeated it several times and looked straight at him, the 
last time she said it. ‘And 1 11 just leave that great 
thought with you/ she cried, and stared hard at Turgis, 
who felt embarrassed. The next moment, the two women 
with short grey hair were playing the violin and piano like 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


150 

mad, and the fussy little man and two others were rushing 
round with collection boxes. Two hundred and fifty 
women dived into handbags and then sat bolt upright, 
trying to look as if they did not know that their right hands 
were all clutching sixpences. Turgis left his pocket alone, 
and when the collection box came his way, he gave it a 
mysterious shake and then passed it on very quickly. 

‘A few minutes* silent meditation/ the woman in the 
fur coat announced, composing her face meditatively. 
All the other women composed their faces meditatively too, 
and then looked down at their shoes. Turgis looked down 
at his, and noticed that one of them was splitting at the 
side. He wanted to waggle his toes to warm his feet, but 
if he began waggling the shoe might split still more. They 
were rotten shoes. Everything he ever bought always 
turned out to be rotten. He was always being taken in. 
What he ought to buy was a pair of good thick Army boots; 
there were still some about in those ex-govemment stores 
shops; and they were cheap and they would last. But 
there again, what was a girl going to think of him if she 
found him clumping about in boots like a navvy's? What 
girl, though? ‘Where d* you get your girls from?* he 
asked himself, with a sneer. There was a rustle and a 
shuffle : the silent meditation was over. 

‘And I *m sure Mr. Frank Dadds needs no introduction 
from me/ the woman in the fur coat was saying. ‘We are 
delighted to have him here with us again. We remember 
the inspiring talks he gave us last time, and we realize that 
we have a treat in store/ And there was an appreciative 
murmur. 

Mr. Frank Dadds of Los Angeles suddenly shot up as the 
woman in the fur coat sat down. He was a tallish, fattish, 
fairish American in a light brown suit and a pink tie. He 
clasped his hands, then rubbed them together. He smiled 
at them all. He was obviously at home in the universe, 
and filled with divine love and power and truth and a 
general sort of oneness. Even Turgis was impressed by 
him, and all the women sat up and gazed at him with 
adoration. Then Mr. Frank Dadds burst into speech. 

4 My friends/ he began, without any hesitation, ‘ the title 
of my lecture this evening is Understanding and Yew. Let 
me commence by talking about Yew, jast Yew. Perhaps 



TURGIS SEES HER 151 

yew don't think much of yourselves. Life doesn't seem to 
yew to offer very much. There are people — and there may 
be some of them here with us to-night — who jast haven't 
got livingness. They think that life is always jast the same 
old thing. They can even talk of killing time. Killing 
time! — when every noo moment of time is diamonded with 
the greatest passibilities of lahv and trewth and bewdy. 
Once we have got livingness — once we have got under- 
standing — once we are in toon with the in-fy-nyte — then 
there is a power within us, yes, within every one of us, that 
can cree-ate the world anoo. Our external selves can 
easily be (laddered. It is easy to make too much of what 
we 've done. But it is com-pletely im-passible for any 
words — no matter if the greatest poets utter those words 
— to fladder what we have within us, our potentialities in 
baddy, mind, and spirrut. We 've got to get rid of what 
some people like to call our in-feriority camplexes. We 've 
got to realize that power within us. That doesn't mean — 
as some people seem to think — that we should develap 
sooperiority camplexes. And why? Bee-chuse, as Noo 
Thought shows us, there is a Oneness in the Universe and 
we are all united in that Oneness. It isn't jast the potes 
who sing lahv songs. The whole Universe sings a lahv song. 
The whole Universe is a lahv song. If it isn’t, the very 
atoms of which we are composed would disintegrate. I 
tell you, my friends, there is radiant health, there is power, 
there is wanderful bewdy, there is lahv, all without stint, 
without measure, eternal, awaiting all of us, and if we only 
open our eyes, find the way, develop understanding, get in 
toon, get livingness, there is not only a heaven above but a 
heaven here upon earth . . .' 

For some twenty-five minutes more, the voice went 
sounding on, offering them radiant health, power, truth, 
beauty, and love, without ever once faltering. Turgis 
could not understand it all, but he listened in a happy 
dream, forgetting that his chair was uncomfortable and his 
feet were cold. He realized that he had only to do some- 
thing or other, get this livingness and oneness and under- 
standing, just turn a comer, and everything would be 
different, everything would be marvellous. Vaguely he 
saw himself trim and sleek, with evening clothes, a huge 
overcoat, white trousers for summer, money in his pocket. 



152 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

money in the bank, an office of his own perhaps, a fiat 
with shaded lights and big chairs and a gramophone 
and a wireless set, even a car, and by his side, worship- 
ping him, the loveliest and kindest of girls. It was 
wonderful. 

'Come again, young man/ said the fussy little man, at 
the door. ‘Always glad to see you here/ 

‘Thank you very much/ said Turgis earnestly, still 
glowing. 

And then, somehow, outside in the wet steets, among 
the black figures hurrying home, it mi went. Angrily he 
tried to recapture the glow and the dream, but they would 
not return. Inside the steaming bus, swaying with the 
strap he held, he found there was nothing left. He did not 
know how to get understanding or livingness or oneness or 
any of those things, could not even imagine what they were. 
Neither radiant health nor power, truth nor beauty, was 
coming his way. As for love, well, he had better chuck 
thinking about it. There was a girl standing next to him, 
not a bad sort of girl, but every time the bus went swaying 
round a corner, he bumped into her, not hurting her but 
just gently bumping into her. He wasn't doing it on 
purpose, but theihird time it happened, she drew back and 
looked daggers at him — silly little idiot! Oh, yes, the 
universe was a love song all right! 

Park was having a cup of tea and a bite of bread-and- 
butter with Mrs. Pelumpton in the back room when he got 
back, and he joined them, telling them where he had been 
and what he had heard. 

‘Dope, my friend, that's all you've had/ said Park 
contemptuously, ‘ nothing but dope ! Comes from America, 
doesn't it? Yes, and why? Because the masses there 
have got to be doped, that 's why. You come with me 
next time and you 'll hear something that 'll open your eyes 
a bit ; no dope, but the real thing. What 's the matter with 
you, Turgis, is that you don't see how your leg's being 
pulled, you 're not properly class-conscious yet/ 

Turgis disliked this contemptuous tone. ‘ Are you what- 
is-it— class-conscious, Park? ' he asked. 

‘Yes, I am/ 

‘Well, you can have it/ Turgis retorted, in a voice that 
told Park pretty plainly that he was a dreary devil. 



TURGIS SEES HER 


153 

‘All right then, my friend, all right. I will have it. 
And you keep on with the dope.' 

‘I don't want any dope. Don't believe in it. 1 
'Well, what do you want then?' demanded Park, who 
thought he saw in this a chance of a fine long argument. 

‘I dunno,' said Turgis, finishing his tea. ‘Yes, I do, 
though. I want to go to bed.' 

‘That 's right/ said Mrs. Pelumpton approvingly. ‘Bed. 
You couldn't go to a better place. I 'm sure I 'm ready* for 
mine. We 're all in . now, except Edgar, and I 'm not 
waiting for him.' 

And then all that was left of Sunday was a walk upstairs. 


v 

Then, the very next day, on Monday of all' days, it hap- 
pened. It happened in the afternoon. Somebody came in, 
and, as Stanley was out, Turgis dashed to the other side of 
the frosted glass partition to see who it was. * There, like a 
being from another world, stood a girl all in , bright green, 
a girl with large brown eyes, the most impudent little nose, 
and a smiling scarlet mouth, the prettiest*girl he had ever 
seen. 

' Good afternoon. Is my father here, please? ' She had 
a queer, fascinating voice. 

‘Your father?' 

‘Yes. Mr. Golspie. This is the place, isn't it? He 
told me to call for him here.' 

‘Oh, yes, he is, Miss — Miss Golspie,' cried Turgis eagerly, 
his eyes devouring her all the time. ‘ He 's in that room 
there. But I think there 's somebody with him. Shall I 
tell him you 're here.' 

‘You needn't yet if he 's busy with somebody,' said the 
glorious creature, smiling at him. ‘I can wait.' 

' I can tell him now, if you like.' He was trembling with 
eagerness to help, to serve. 

‘No, it doesn't matter. I know he hates being inter- 
rupted. I '11 wait for him. I don't suppose he '11 be long, 
will he ? ' 

‘I 'm sure he won't,' he told her fervently. ‘Will you 
wait here or in the office? It 's warmer in the office.' 



154 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

'This will do/ and she made a movement towards the 
chair. 

' Excuse me, Miss Golspie/ He brought it stumbling out 
somehow, and at the same time he dusted the seat of the 
chair with his handkerchief. 'It — it — might be dirty, 
y' know.' 

She looked him full in the eyes, deliciously, drowning 
him in sweetness, and then smiled. 'Thank you. I 'd 
hafe to spoil my new coat. Everything looks a bit grimy 
here, doesn't it ? It 's such a frightfully dark place, too, 
isn't it ? ' 

He supposed it was, and tried to imagine her walking up 
Angel Pavement outside. He still lingered. 'Is there 
anything else/ he began vaguely, hovering, adoring her. 

'Quite happy, thanks/ 

There was no excuse possible to stay a moment longer. 
Reluctantly he returned to his desk, with his heart swelling 
with excitement. The others looked at him inquiringly, 
but he pretended to be busy with something. He did not 
even want to explain about a girl like that. He wanted to 
keep the very thought of her being there to himself. Mean- 
while, he was determined to listen hard. The moment that 
he heard Mr. Golspie's visitor going, he would rush out, tell 
Mr. Golspie she was there, and thus see her again. 

But he was not able to manage it. Mr. Golspie must 
have shown his visitor out, for immediately after the door 
was opened, Turgis heard Mr. Golspie's voice booming 
behind the partition. * Hello, Lena girl ! ' he heard him say. 
'Forgotten about you coming. Won't keep you a minute.' 

Mr. Golspie then came into the office. 'I 've got to go 
out/ he told Mr. Smeeth, ' and I shan't be coming back to- 
day. Be in about eleven in the morning though, if any- 
body wants me. Mr. Dersingham ’ll be back to-morrow 
afternoon, if anybody wants him. And I say, what 's your 
name — T urgis ' 

‘Yes, sir/ replied Turgis smartly. 

'Get hold of the Anglo-Baltic — Mr. Borstein, nobody 
else, mind, Mr. Borstein — and tell him from me that if 
we 've any more delays like that with the stuff, there 's 
going to be heap big trouble. They said they wouldn't let 
us down, and they 're letting us down like hell. And you 
can tell him that from me/ 



TURGIS SEES HER 155 

'Yes, sir, I will. Did you say Mr. Borstein?' And 
Turgis stared at Miss Lena Golspie's father, at his massive 
bald front, at his great moustache, at his big square 
shoulders. Mr. Golspie had never seemed an ordinary man, 
but now he had for Turgis the power and fascination of a 
demi-god. Already his very name spelt sweetness and 
wonder. 

‘That 's the chap/ Mr. Golspie grunted. ‘Afternoon, 
everybody/ And he departed. 

‘That was Mr. Golspie's daughter then who came to the 
door, was it ? ' said Mr. Smeeth. 

‘ His daughter, eh ? ' Miss Matfield raised her eyebrows, 
then looked at Turgis, and said casually: ‘What was she 
like? Pretty?' 

‘Yes/ Turgis mumbled, * she was.' And he would say no 
more. He was not going to talk about her. He preferred 
to think about her. Lena Golspie. 

Then, with something like amorous urgency, he went to 
the telephone, rang up the Anglo-Baltic, and sternly de- 
manded Mr. Borstein. He would tell Mr, jBorstein some- 
thing! He would show him whether he could let them 
down like hell! Lena Golspie. Lena Golspie. Lena, Lena, 
Lena. ‘Hello, is that Mr. Borstein? This is Twigg and 
Dersingham. Yes, Twigg and Dersingham. Mr. Golspie 
asked me to ring you up — Mr. Gols-pie, Mr. Gol-spie. . . / 
Lena's father. Lena, Lena, Lena. 


*F93* 



CHAPTER V 


MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 
I 

Mr. Golspie took the typewritten sheets from Miss Matfield 
and then spread them out on her table. ‘All six letters 
alike, eh? That ’s the style, Miss Matfield. Hello, is this 
exactly what I said? ' 

‘As a matter of fact, it isn’t.’ And Miss Matfield raised 
her eyes and gave him a steady level glance. 

‘As a matter of fact, is isn’t, eh? Then what is it, as a 
matter of fact ? Just a little improvement, eh? ' 

Miss Matfield coloured slightly. ‘Well, if you want to 
know, Mr. Golspie, all I 've done is to change was into were 
twice, simply for the sake of making it more grammatical. 
That 's all.’ 

‘Half a minute, half a minute,’ Mr. Golspie boomed at 
her. ‘Not more grammatical. Just grammatical. You 
made it grammatical when before it wasn’t grammatical. 
Either it 's grammatical or it isn’t, d' you see? And now 
I’m being more grammatical, eh?' He guffawed, sud- 
denly, dreadfully. 

'I don’t pretend to be particularly marvellous about 
grammar,’ she replied, trying to be severe, ‘but I do happen 
to know when to use was and when to use were. It ’s one 
of the few things they taught me. And so I thought you 
wouldn't object if I changed them.’ 

‘Much obliged.’ He regarded her amiably. ‘By the 
way, what is it you do pretend to be particularly marvel- 
lous at?’ 

‘Does that matter? ’ This in her best haughty manner. 
Everybody in the office knew it and respected it. 

But Mr. Golspie only gave her a friendly leer. ‘Of 
course it matters,' he declared heartily. ‘Now I like to 
know these things. Take me. I used to play a good game 
at billiards, and I can still play poker with the best, bridge, 

156 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 157 

too. Oh, and I can crack walnuts between my finger and 
thumb— fact ! * He held up a very large thick hairy finger 
and thumb that matched it. ‘And that 's not all either. 
Still — we are a bit busy, aren't we? ' 

' I am.' Miss Matfield looked at her typewriter. 

‘And so/ he continued cheerfully, ‘for the time being, 
we 11 say it doesn't matter. I ‘11 take these nice gram- 
matical letters away with me. You 've addressed the 
envelopes, have you? Right.' He turned his broad back 
on her, gave Mr. Smeeth a wink, whistled softly, and 
departed for the private office. 

Miss Matfield drew her full lower lip between her teeth 
and frowned at her typewriter. As usual, she was left with 
a vague sense of defeat. It was, of course, the man's in- 
sensitiveness — and she saw again that largfe thick hairy 
finger — that made him so difficult to snub. Nobody else 
in the office had dared to talk to her as he did f not after she 
had spent her first hour in the building. It WpLS a nuisance, 
not being able to put him in his place, as Mr; Dersingham, 
Mr. Smeeth, and the others had been put in thtir places. It 
was annoying to think that the very next time he spoke to 
her, he would probably talk in the same strain, not alto- 
gether an unfriendly strain, but disrespectful, jeering, 
humiliating in a fashion. She could not really stand up 
to it, but found herself wanting to lower her eyes, turn her 
head away, and almost retreat in maidenly blushes — oh, 
gosh ! Lilian Matfield feeling like that ! How her friends 
would howl if they knew I Yet she didn't really dislike 
him, not now. 

A little later, when they were clearing up for the night, 
she was presented with this problem of Mr. Golspie again 
by some artless questions from the little Sellers girl, who 
still treated Miss Matfield with great deference and thus 
was still in favour. 

‘He's funny, isn't he?' said Miss Sellers, referring to 
Mr. Golspie. 

‘A bit weird/ 

‘I wish you 'd tell me, Miss Matfield/ Miss Sellers con- 
tinued, earnestly and deferentially, ‘d'you reelly like 
him?' 

Miss Matfield raised her thick black brows and produced 
a long mtnm sound that went up and then down again. 



158 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

Having gone through this little performance, she said, 
‘Do you?* 

‘Well/ said Miss Sellers, wrinkling her little nose in an 
agony of mental effort, 'I do an' I don't — if you see what 
I mean/ 

Miss Matfield knew exactly what she meant, but did not 
say so. She merely gave the other girl an encouraging 
glance. 

‘Sometimes I think he's nice,' Miss Sellers went on, 
staring at nothing, *an' sometimes I don't like him a bit. 
Not that he ever says anything or does anything, y' know — 
course I don't see as much of him as you do. Miss Matfield — 
but sometimes I catch a crool look ' 

' A what ? ' 

Miss Sellers's voice had dropped to a whisper. ‘A crool 
look,' she repeated, her eyes enormous. ‘An' a reel nasty 
tone of voice he 's got too, sometimes. And then I think, 
“Well, I don't like you, and I wouldn't like to cross your 
path, that I wouldn't." And then the next time, he 's as 
nice as anything. But I don't like him as much as I like 
Mr. Dersingham. Do you, Miss Matfield? Mr. Dersing- 
ham's a reel gentleman, isn't he? I like him best.' 

‘I don't.' This came in a hoarse whisper. It was from 
Stanley, who, free from his letter-copying for a minute, had 
quietly ioined them. 

‘Now who asked you your opinion?' Miss Sellers de- 
manded. ‘ You go away. ' 

‘ I like Mr. Golspie best,' said Stanley, contriving to intro- 
duce an enthusiastic note into his hoarse whisper. ‘An' 
I '11 tell you why. He 's what they call a man's man. I '11 
bet he 's had advenshers.' 

‘You an' your advenshers! ' Miss Sellers was very con- 
temptuous. ‘What d'you know about it?' 

'I 've heard things, I have,' said Stanley, very slowly 
and impressively. 

‘ What have you heard ? ' 

Shan’t tell you/ 

‘No, because you 've got nothing to tell. You run away 
and get your work done, little boy.' 

‘ I 'm as big as you are.' 

' Cheeky 1 Here, you want to go an' shadder a few 
manners the next time you go shaddering,' Miss Sellers 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 159 

jeered, singling out, with feminine swiftness and accuracy, 
the weak joint in the other's armour. 

'Huh! Shan't learn 'em from you.* 

‘Oh, be quiet, the pair of you,’ cried Miss Matfield, and 
began tidying her table. Nothing more was said about Mr. 
Golspie, but on her way home Miss Matfield could not help 
thinking about him. She always had a book with her for 
the journey on the 13 bus to and from the office, but the 
jogging and the crowding and the changing lights did not 
make reading easy, especially on the return journey to West 
Hampstead, and frequently she spent more time with her 
own thoughts than she did with those of her author. On 
this particular evening, Mr. Golspie claimed her attention, 
almost to the exclusion of anybody or anything else. She 
could not make up her mind about him, had no label or 
pigeon-hole ready for him, and this annoyed her, for she 
liked to know exactly what she felt and thought about 
people; to be able to dismiss them in a phrase. The fact 
that Mr. Golspie spoke to her every day, if only for a few 
minutes, gave her work to do, was sufficient to make her 
anxious to determine her attitude towards hkn. Men, with 
their thick skins and yawning indifference, might be able 
to work with people for years and not know or care any- 
thing about them as persons, but this drab stuff about 
'governors* and 'colleagues' could find no place to stay in 
Miss Matfield’s mind. In the talk among the girls at the 
Club, all the men who dictated letters to them became 
immense characters, comic, grotesquely villainous, or 
heroic and adorable. Their femininity, frozen for a few 
hours every day at the keyboard of their machines, thawed 
and gushed out in these perfervid personalities. Behind 
their lowered eyes, their demure expressions, as they sat 
with their note-books on hard little office chairs, these comic 
and romantic legends buzzed and sang, to be released later 
in the dining-room, the lounge, the tiny bedrooms, of the 
Club. Thus, something had to be done about Mr. Golspie, 
who would have appeared to most of the girls, as Miss 
Matfield knew only too well, a gigantic find, a mine of 
glittering material. So far he had merely passed as ‘ weird,' 
but that would not do. It had not sufficed in Miss Mat- 
field's private thoughts since the first two days. 

She knew exactly what she thought about the others at 



160 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

the office. Mr. Dersingham she neither liked not disliked; 
she merely tolerated him, with a sort of easy contempt; he 
was * sloppy and a bit feeble/ and a familiar type, with 
nothing at all weird about him . Smeeth seemed to her a 
vaguely pathetic creature who lived a grey life in some 
grey suburb; the pleasure he got from what seemed to her 
his drudgery sometimes irritated her, but at other times it 
roused something like pity; and when she was not despising 
him, she liked him. Turgis she despised and occasionally 
resented. She resented his shabbiness and dinginess, his 
unhealthy skin and open mouth, his whole forlorn air, 
simply because these things, which were always there in 
the office, beside her, hurt her own pride by indicating the 
indignity of her situation. Occasionally, perhaps after a 
week-end in the country, when the thought of going back 
to Angel Pavement almost — as she said — made her feel 
sick, there flashed through her mind an image of Turgis. 
There had been moments when she had felt sorry for him, 
but they were very rare. Stanley and the funny little 
Cockney girl she tolerated and even liked, so long as they 
behaved themselves, and they might have been a couple oi 
amusing little animals, a pair of spaniels perhaps, inferior 
and somewhat neglected. All these people were securely 
in their places. But not Mr. Golspie, the mysterious, large, 
jocular, brutal man, who always contrived — and for the 
life of her she could not discover how he did it — to get the 
best of her in any talk between them, who irritated one half 
of her, the sensible half, by making the other half feel 
fluttered and foolish, ail girlish — ugh! How she had 
loathed him at first! Well, she still loathed him, or at 
least she disliked him, despised him, because he was nothing 
but a middle-aged bullying lout. He had a ridiculous 
moustache. He reeked of cigars and whisky, bar parlours. 
He was at once comic and awful. 

As the bus rattled and roared up the long straight slope 
of Finchley Road on its way to Swiss Cottage, she told 
herself several times that Golspie was comic and awful and 
found something comforting in this conclusion. It was not, 
however, much of a conclusion; it only remained one for a 
few minutes, for Mr. Golspie, even in memory, even as an 
image, a faintly illuminated leer in the dark of her mind 
(like the Cheshire Cat in Alice), refused to stay in his place 



MISS. MATFIELD WONDERS 161 

and wear his label. He escaped, and mocked her. It was 
all too stupid, and when she got up to leave the bus 
she determined to leave Mr. Golspie behind her too. She 
found another girl from the Club waiting for the bus to stop, 
and when it did stop, they smiled at one another and walked 
up from the Finchley Road together. Mr. Golspie faded 
away. 

'Do you come all the way from the City in that bus, 
Matfield?' the other girl inquired languidly. She was a 
very languid girl, rather affected, and her name was 
Morrison. 

'The whole way/ 

* How revolting 1 ' 

' It is. Absolutely foul ! Where do you get it, Morrison ? 
You don't work in the City, do you ? * 

'No, Bayswater/ Miss Morrison sighed. *1 get it just in 
Orchard Street. I have to take another bus first along 
Bayswater Road. Unless I walk, and I loithe walking, 
specially on these beastly dark nights. Even then, it 
seems an awfully long way/ 

'Nothing to the way I have to come/ said Miss Matfield, 
sternly. When there was any grumbling about, and there 
usually was some about, she liked to have her share. 'Some- 
times it takes hours and hours/ 

‘I know. I took a job in the City once and I only stuck 
it a week/ Miss Morrison groaned in the darkness at the 
thought of it. ' I nearly died. Honestly, Matfield, if 1 'd 
to go to the City every day and come back here, I 'd die, 
I 'd absolutely pass out, I would really. I don't know how 
you stick it. But then you 're so energetic, aren't you ? ' 

Miss Matfield at once denied this terrible charge, and 
told herself that the Morrison girl was pretty awful. ' I 'm 
worn out now/ she continued. 'Only I 'd rather have the 
City because I can't bear those private secretary jobs. 
Yours is one of them, isn't it?' 

‘Yes/ with another sigh. 'And pretty ghastly. The 
woman I 'm working for now means well, but she 's an 
idiot, she really is, Matfield, a full-sized idiot. No man in 
any office could ever be such an idiot. She 's just dotty/ 

‘Well, here we are at our beautiful home/ said Miss 
Matfield, looking up at the Club entrance. 

‘ I know. Isn't it revolting ? ' 



162 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

'Absolutely vile/ she replied mechanically, as they 
walked in. 1 1 don't suppose there are any letters for me. 
No, of course not. There wouldn't be/ 

‘Mine's a bill/ Miss Morrison groaned. ‘Are you always 
getting bills? I never Seem to get anything else. Just 
millions of foul bills/ 

‘Foul! Cheerio.' 

‘ Oh — er — cheerio/ 


II 

The Burpenfield Club, called after Lady Burpenfield, who 
had given five thousand pounds to the original fund, was 
one of the residential clubs or hostels provided for girls 
who came from good middle-class homes in the country 
but were compelled, by economic conditions still artfully 
adjusted to suit the male, to live in London as cheaply as 
possible. Two fairly large houses had been thrown to- 
gether and their upper floors converted into a host of tiny 
bedrooms, and there was accommodation for about sixty 
girls. For twenty-five to thirty shillings a week, the Club 
gave them a bedroom, breakfast, and dinner throughout 
the week, and all meals on Saturday and Sunday. It was 
light and well ventilated and very clean, offered an as- 
tonishing amount of really hot water, and had a large 
lounge, a drawing-room (No Smoking), a small reading- 
room and library (Quiet Please), and a garden stocked with 
the hardiest annuals. The food was not brilliant — and no 
doubt it returned to the table too often in the shape of 
fish-cakes, rissoles, and shepherd’s pie — but it was reason- 
ably wholesome and could be eaten with safety if not with 
positive pleasure. The staff was very efficient and was 
controlled, as everybody and everything else in the Club 
was controlled, by the Secretary, Miss Tattersby, daughter 
of the late Dean of Welborough, and perhaps the most 
respectable woman in all Europe. The rules were not too 
strict. There were no compulsory, religious services. Male 
visitors could not be entertained in bedrooms but could be 
brought to dinner and were allowed in the lounge, where 
they occasionally might be seen, sitting in abject misery. 
Intoxicants were not supplied by the Club but could be 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 163 

introduced, in reasonable quantities, into the dining- 
room when guests were present. Smoking was permitted, 
except in the dining- and drawing-rooms. There were a 
good many regulations about beds and baths and washing 
and so forth, but they were not oppressive. In the even- 
ings, throughout the winter months, fires, quite large 
cheerful fires, brightened all the public rooms. The lighting 
was good. The beds and chairs were fairly comfortable. 
Dramatic entertainments and dances were given two or 
three times a year. All this for less than it would cost to 
live in some dingy and dismal boarding-house or the 
pokiest of poky flats. 

What more could a girl want ? Parents and friends of 
the family who visited the Burpenfield found themselves 
compelled to ask this question. The answer was that 
there was only one thing that most girls at the Burpenfield 
did want, and that was to get away. It was very odd. 
You were congratulated on getting into the Burpenfield 
when you first went there, and you were congratulated even 
more heartily when you finally left it. During the time 
you were there, you grumbled, having completely lost sight 
of the solid advantages of the place. The girls who stayed 
there year after year until at last they were girls no longer 
but women growing grey, did stop grumbling and even 
pointed out to one another these solid advantages, but 
their faces always wore a resigned look. 

There was, to begin with, that institution atmosphere, 
which was rather depressing. The sight of those long 
tiled corridors did not cheer you when you returned, tired, 
rather cross, headachy, from work in the evening. The 
food was monotonous and the dining-room too noisy. Then, 
if you were not going out, you had to choose between your 
little box of a bedroom, the lounge (usually dominated by a 
clique of young insufferable rowdies), or the silent and in- 
human drawing-room. Moreover, Miss Tattersby, known 
as 'Tatters,' was terrifying. Very early, Miss Tattersby 
had arrived at the sound conclusion that a brisk rough 
sarcasm was her best weapon, and she made full use of it. 
You felt the weight and force of it even in the notices she 
was so fond of pinning up : 4 Need residents who have First 
Dinner take up so much time . . .' ; * Some residents seem to 
have forgotten that the Staff has other duties besides . . 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


1S4 

‘Is it necessary again to remind residents that washing 
stockings in the bathrooms . . /: that is how they went. 
But this, after all, was only a pale reflection of her method 
in direct talk, and some girls, finding themselves involved 
in an intricate affair concerning a pair of stockings or some- 
thing of that kind, preferred to conduct their side of the 
case by correspondence, in the shape of little notes to Miss 
Tattersby hastily left in her office when she was known to 
be out. Many a girl, after a little brush with ‘ Tatters/ who 
was immensely tall and bony and staring, and looked like a 
soured Victorian celebrity, had faced the most infuriated 
director at her office with a mere shrug. The confident 
Burpenfield manner in commercial life, of which we have 
seen something in Miss Matfield in Angel Pavement, was 
probably the result of various encounters with Miss 
Tattersby. 

But what Miss Matfield, who was cursing the place all 
over again as she left Miss Morrison and went upstairs to 
her room, disliked most about the Burpenfield was the 
presence of all the other members, whose life she had to 
share. There were too many of them, and their mode of 
life was like an awful parody of her own. The thought 
that her own existence would seem to an outsider just like 
theirs infuriated or saddened her, for she felt that really 
she was quite different from these others, much superior, a 
more vital, splendid being. Those whose situation was not 
at all like her own only annoyed her still more. There were 
the young girls, all rosy and confident, many of whom were 
either engaged (to the most hopelessly idiotic young man) 
or merely filling in a few months of larking about, trying 
one absurd thing after another, while their doting fathers 
forwarded generous monthly cheques. Then there were 
the women older than herself, downright spinsters in their 
thirties and early forties, who had grown grey and withered 
at the typewriter and the telephone, who knitted, droned on 
interminably about dull holidays they had had, took to 
fancy religions, quietly went mad, whose lives narrowed 
down to a point at which washing stockings became the 
supreme interest. Some of them were frankly depressing. 
You met them drooping about the corridors, kettle in hand, 
and they seemed to think about nothing but hot water. 
Others were mechanically and terribly brisk and bright, all 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 165 

nervy jauntiness, laborious slang, and secret orgies of 
aspirin, and these creatures — poor old things — were if any- 
thing more depressing, the very limit. Sometimes, when 
she was tired and nothing much was happening, Miss 
Matficld saw in one of these women an awful glimpse of her 
own future, and then she rushed into her bedroom and made 
the most fantastic and desperate plans, not one of which 
she ever attempted to carry out. Meanwhile, time was 
slipping away and nothing was happening. Soon she 
would be thirty. Thirty! People could say what they 
liked — but life was foul. 

There was still half an hour before dinner, and, after tidy- 
ing herself, she sat on her bed trying to repair a ladder in a 
second-best pair of stockings. She was interrupted by a 
knock at the door and the entrance of an extraordinary 
figure. It had a greeny-brown face and was jessed in 
what appeared to be Oriental costume, and the general 
effect was that of a seasick Arab chieftain. 

'Help!' cried Miss Matfield, but only to tier visitor. 
'What is it? Who are you? It can't be yo^, Caddie.' 

The green face never moved a muscle, but a Careful voice 
came from it, and the voice, though muffled jaud lacking 
its usual variety of tones, was undoubtedly that of her 
neighbour, Miss Isabel Cadnam, otherwise ‘Caddie.' She 
had put a mud pack on her face and had wrapped her head 
in a towel. 

‘And you haven't to smile or anything/ she announced 
cautiously, ‘or it 'll crack. But I 've come to ask you a 
favour. Are you in to-night ? I mean you 're not dress- 
ing or anything grand? Well, can I borrow your shawl, 
the reddy-black one? You promised to lend it to me, if 
I wanted it terribly some night.' 

Miss Matfield nodded. 

‘Well, this is the night. A great do. My dear, Ivor 's 
got tickets for a new cabaret, dance and supper place, open- 
ing night to-night, and we're going. Marvellous!' The 
face did not move but the eyes rolled and flashed their ap- 
preciation. 

‘All right, you can have the shawl, Caddie/ said Miss 
Matfield, lazily rising to stretch out a hand for it. That 
is all you have to do to find anything in a Burpenfield 
bedroom. ‘ It sounds marvellous. But I thought you 'd 



i66 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


had a row with Ivor, parted for ever for the umpteenth 
time and all that. Why, it 's only last Friday you spent 
hours and hours telling me about it.' 

'We made it up this morning,' the green mask replied, 
rolling its eyes. * Started over the telephone, too, my dear. 
Ivor tried to explain and then about forty people in the 
office went off the deep end, so I said I 'd meet him for 
lunch. We met. And there you are. And now we 're 
going on the razzle.' 

'Lucky you!* 

‘I will say that for Ivor. He can be terribly, terribly 
stupid, almost stupider than anybody I know, except those 
foul brutes at the office — honestly, my dear, they are the 
limit — but the minute we 've made it up, he always has 
tickets for something amusing. Free list, you know.' 

'I believe he waits until he has the tickets, then rings 
you up that morning and makes it up,' said Miss Matfield. 
'I wouldn't put it past him.' 

‘What a perfectly loathsome idea, Mattie! What a 
foul mind you have! Still, he might do that. Rather 
sweet of him, really, when you think about it. Well, I 
shall have to fly. I 've got to get this stuff off. I 've 
been wearing it for hours and I feel I shall never be able 
to smile again. Thanks for the shawl, and, my dear, I '11 
take the greatest, the very greatest care of it, and you shall 
have it back in the morning.* 

‘Have a good time,' said Miss Matfield, with no par- 
ticular enthusiasm. 'Give my love to Ivor.' 

When her visitor had gone, she gave a little impatient 
shake, sat down again, but threw the stocking on one side. 
Caddie was really rather a silly creature, but nevertheless 
she contrived to have quite an amusing, even exciting time. 
Ivor, a goggly-eyed young man who was with a firm of 
publicity people, was even sillier than she was, and Miss 
Matfield admitted to herself at once that she could not 
possibly endure a single hour of his company, but he 
pleased Caddie, took her out, quarrelled with her, made 
it up, took her out more luxuriously, created a continual 
excitement. It was possible to envy Caddie's state of mind 
while despising her taste. Miss Matfield's ripe mouth, 
which hardly needed lipstick, took on a discontented curve. 
It was a pity that silly young men did not amuse her, foi 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 167 

there were plenty of Ivors about, whereas there were very 
few real grown-up men about, men who could make her 
feel she was still a mere girl. She was beginning to like, 
definitely to prefer, middle-aged men — and admitted as 
much to her intimates — but the trouble was that the really 
nice attractive ones were nearly always terribly domesti- 
cated, up to the neck in wives and families, and hardly 
more than an occasional faint gleam of interest to spare 
for a Miss Matfield. The middle-aged men who were in- 
terested were always the awful ones, with swollen faces 
and little boiled eyes, dreary rotters. Mr. Golspie? No, 
he wasn’t as bad as that, wasn’t quite that type. But 
quite impossible, of course. Quite absurd. 

The gong went clanging below, and as it sounded, a head 
popped into the room. ‘You 're in, aren’t you, Mattie? ' it 
said. * Come on then. I Ve got some News. Very exciting.’ 

This head, which was decorated with a thick shock of 
fair hair, horn spectacles, a freckled and turaefl-up nose, 
and a wide and amusing mouth, belonged to Evelyn 
Ansdell, who had had a room close to Miss Hatfield’s for 
the last two years, and who was one of the very few friends 
she had made at the Burpenfield. She was a slap-dash, 
untidy, scatter-brained sort of girl, younger than Miss 
Matfield, and though she had all manner of minor faults, 
she had the two outstanding virtues of being good-hearted 
and extremely entertaining. 

The two girls went down to the dining-room together 
and were fortunate enough to get a little table to them- 
selves. There, amid the chatter and clatter that went 
with the mutton stew and the prunes and custard, Miss 
Ansdell broke the news, in a series of shrieks and gasps. 

‘I'm nearly dead,’ she began, impressively. ‘No, 
really nearly dead. I 've been ringing up parents like 
mad for the last hour and a half. Don’t I sound hoarse? 
Honestly, I Ve been screaming and screaming down the 
telephone.' 

There was nothing novel about this. Miss Matfield 
knew all about Evelyn’s parents. They were a queer 
pair, and had been separated for the last four or five years. 
Mrs. Ansdell roamed about the country, sometimes trying 
her hand at odd things, while Major Ansdell, no longer in 
the army but now the representative of some mysterious 



i68 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


imperial organization, roamed about the whole world, 
completely disappearing for months on end. Now and 
then, each of them descended upon London and the Bur- 
penfield, and by some odd chance it frequently happened 
that their London visits coincided, and then Evelyn had 
to work desperately hard to make sure that they did not 
arrive at the Club together. Evelyn herself, who had 
once been sent flying between them like an amused shuttle- 
cock, did not take sides, except perhaps in certain minor 
differences, but preserved an amiable detachment, not un- 
like that of a good old referee. Everything was complicated 
by the fact that all three of them were rather eccentric. 
All this was very strange to Miss Matfield, whose parents 
adored one another in their dull elderly fashion and were, 
anyhow, far too sensible and too busy for such alarms and 
excursions; but the actual novelty of it had passed. So 
she merely prepared herself to listen to yet another in- 
stalment of the Ansdell family row saga. 

'It all began with a letter from mother/ Miss Ansdell 
continued, excitedly. ' It came this afternoon. My dear, 
the maddest letter. But the point is, mother 's going to 
run a shop, selling antiques. I forget the name of the 
place, but anyhow she ’s actually got the shop and it 's a 
marvellous place, all oak beams and bow windows and all 
that, and rich motorists stopping every minute. That 's 
not so crazy as it sounds, because mother does really know 
about antiques and old embroideries and things like that, 
and could make anybody buy anything if she wanted to. 
And she wants me to go and live with her, and help her in 
the shop/ 

'Oh, lord!' Miss Matfield groaned. 'But you're not 
going, are you? She 's wanted you to go before, hasn't 
she?' 

'Yes, but this is rather different. Quite different, in 
fact. It really would be rather fun helping her in a shop. 
I 'd much rather do that, swindling the rich motorists, 
than go on with this secretary rot. You know how I loathe 
typing and shorthand. And this time she wants me very 
badly — her own little darling girl by her side sort of thing 
— you should have seen her letter. So I rang her up — 
trunk call, my dear, and I 'm absolutely broke — to know 
all about it, and honestly it does sound rather marvellous. 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 169 

Lovely shop, nice did town, lots of nice people, and a car 
— you have to have a car in this antique business. I must 
say — even though I know what mother is — I must say it 
sounds rather marvellous. ' 

* It does/ Miss Matfield admitted, grudgingly. 

‘But wait a minute, wait a minute, Mattie, my dear. 
That isn't all the excitement. Oh, no. Before I rang off, 
mother gave me a message to father about some money. 
He 's in town, you know. So I rang him up and then, 
after I 'd given him the message, I told him what mother 
had suggested. Well, you should have heard him. I 
thought every minute I should hear him going up in sheets 
of flame. Then he was very quiet, and I knew he was 
going to be pathetic. He can do it even better than mother. 
If he really gets going, I 'd agree to anything— while he 's 
there. And he said he had a plan he 'd had in his mind for 
months, been thinking about nothing else, and that he 'd 
have mentioned it before only he thought I wa& so happy 
here at the Burpenfield. He 's going away itgain very 
soon on this Empire rot, and he wants me to gb with him 
as his secretary. He *s going to America — Montreal and 
Toronto and those places — and then on to Australia, and 
I 'd go everywhere with him. What do you think about 
that? He said he 'd been thinking about it for ages, but 
I believe he 'd invented the job five minutes before, just 
to do mother in the eye. And now they both want an 
answer at once. Isn't it crazy? ' 

'Completely mad/ But why did nothing like that ever 
happen to her ? ‘ What are you going to do ? * 

'My dear, I 'm going to take one of them. Wouldn't 
you? But which, I don't know. What do you think? ' 

‘Let's get our coffee,* said Miss Matfield. 'Then we 
can talk about it afterwards.' 

This was a blow. Whether Ansdell went off to Canada 
and Australia or joined her mother at the antique shop, 
she was lost to the Burpenfield. Another decent and 
amusing one gone! Something exciting happening to 
somebody else, as usual! And Miss Matfield was so busy 
feeling sorry for herself that if her advice had really been 
demanded over the coffee, she would not have found it 
easy to give it. Miss Ansdell, however, like many people 
who ask to be advised, apparently only wanted a listener, 



170 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

for she never stopped talking herself and when she put a 
question, promptly answered it without giving her friend 
time to frame a reply. 

When they came up from the dining-room, they saw a 
tall figure standing just inside the entrance hall. 'I be- 
lieve it is/ Miss Ansdell gasped. * Yes, it is. It ’s father. 
Oh, help! ' 

And Major Ansdell it was. Miss Matfield had met him, 
just for a few minutes, two or three times before. He 
was still a handsome, soldierly looking man, though quite 
elderly, and was immensely courteous in the Roger de 
Coverley style to all Evelyn’s friends. But there was in 
him an extraordinary theatrical strain. Quite frequently 
he behaved as if he were the hero of some old-fashioned 
melodrama; and was very emotional, very rhetorical, and 
absurd. He was quite capable of talking just as men talk 
in bad stories in popular magazines, and Miss Matfield had 
sometimes wondered whether it was because he had read 
a great many bad stories or because the stories were nearer 
the truth than one thought and were worked up, on the 
fringes of Empire, out of men like Major Ansdell. 

Miss Matfield hung back and saw the Ansdells greet one 
another and then go upstairs, obviously to Evelyn’s room. 
There was no talking to Major Ansdell in a public room; 
he was far to fond of a scene and was not at ah shy. Miss 
Matfield went into the lounge, to smoke a cigarette, and 
spent an envious ten minutes glancing through one of those 
illustrated weeklies that seem to be produced simply to 
glorify that small section of society which works only to 
keep itself amused. It showed her photographs of these 
demigods and goddesses racing and hunting in the cold 
places, bathing and lounging in the warm places, and 
eating and drinking and swaggering in places of every 
temperature. By this time she had finished her cigarette, 
Miss Matfield quite understood the temptation to start a 
revolution, and told herself that these papers simply asked 
for one. Then she too went up to her room. 

She had not been there more than a few minutes when 
Evelyn Ansdell burst in, crying: ‘My dear, mother's on 
the phone. Do go in and talk to father until I come back. 
If you don't, he ’ll come down and do something absurd. 
1 *11 be as quick as I can.* And off she went. 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 171 

Evelyn's bedroom seemed almost entirely filled by her 
father, who welcomed his daughter's friend — and Miss 
Matfield felt herself thrust into the part of daughter's 
friend at once — with his usual grave and elaborate court- 
esy. He was, she felt, enjoying himself, and was probably 
the only man who ever had enjoyed himself visiting the 
Burpenfield. He addressed her as ‘Miss Mattie,' having 
heard Evelyn refer to her as ‘Mattie,' and Miss Matfield 
did not feel like correcting him. This only made every- 
thing more absurd. It was like taking part in a charade. 

' I think you know why I 'm here, Miss Mattie,' he began, 
in deep vibrating tones. ‘I want to persuade this little 
girl of mine to go overseas with me, to help me with the 
great work I am doing and to be by my side.' 

She nodded and made a vague affirmatory noise. It 
was all she could do, but then he did not want anything 
more. 

‘A father has his feelings, Miss Mattie. We don't hear 
much about them. He keeps them to himself. He hides 
them, buries them,' he continued, with fine emotional 
effect, clearly enjoying himself. 'An Englishman doesn't 
like to make a display of these things. It 's part of the 
tradition — the great tradition — of our race. If we suffer, 
Miss Mattie, we like to suffer in silence. Isn't that so? 
The Britisher — now, just a moment. I know what you Te 
going ty say.' 

'Do you?' 

‘ I do. You Te going to say that you don't like that word 
“Britisher."' 

‘I don't like it much, I must say,* Miss Matfield con- 
fessed. 

‘I knew you didn't. I didn't at one time. I detested 
the term. I wouldn't have it at all. But my work, my 
travels up and down the Empire have taught me better. 
We must have something that describes not an Englishman, 
not a Scotsman, or a Canadian, or an Australian, but 
simply a subject of the great Empire itself, and the only 
word for that is “Britisher." Don’t resent it. Miss Mattie. 
It stands for a great ideal. And I say that the Britisher 
doesn't wear his heart on his sleeve. But he feels deeply. 
He may have his work to do, taking him away from his 
home into the loneliest places, and be glad and proud to do 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


172 

it/ Here the Major made a fine gesture and came within 
an ace of wrecking his daughter's toilet stand. So he sat 
down on the edge of the bed, where he looked enormous 
and rather like the White Knight in Through the Looking- 
Glass . 

'You 're my little girl's friend, aren't you. Miss Mattie? ' 
he asked. 

Miss Matfield said she was, and added that she would be 
very sorry to lose her. 

'I understand that, I understand that/ and he reached 
over and patted her lightly on the shoulder. 'She's a 
very lovable child, isn't she? And you can understand a 
father’s feelings. I have my work to do, Miss Mattie, and 
I have many acquaintances, friends if you like, in all parts 
of the world, but fundamentally, at heart, I 'm a lonely 
man — yes, a lonely man. Evelyn 's my only child, and I 
want her companionship, I want her by my side, unless of 
course I should be called upon to visit places where one’s 
womenfolk couldn't be taken. If it were a question of our 
tropical possessions, that would be different, quite different. 
I don't like to see a white woman, especially a young girl, 
in such places. They 're for men, for us rough fellows who 
like to clean up some backward part of the globe. If 
you 've any influence with her — and I 'm sure you have, 
and a very good influence too, a steadying influence 
naturally, being older ' 

'Thank you, Major Ansdell,' said Miss Matfield drily. 
'You make me sound about fifty. It 's not very comph- 
mentary of you.' 

'A thousand apologies, my dear Miss Mattie,' cried the 
Major gallantly. ' I know very well you 're under thirty, 
a mere girl, and a very charming one, I assure you. But 
Evelyn's a mere child , you see, isn't she? ' 

Miss Matfield said nothing, but thought that some of the 
child's antics .and talk might possibly astonish him. 

'But what I was about to say is this. I want you to 
use your influence with my little girl to persuade her to 
come with her old father and join her life with mine. 
There 's some ridiculous talk,' he continued hurriedly and 
more naturally, 'of her joining her mother in some wild-cat 
scheme for selling old furniture and broken crockery and 
silly knick-knacks down in the country somewhere. You 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 173 

know the sort of place. Ye oldy antique shoppy I Faked 
warming-pans! Rubbish! Even if she won't come with 
me, I 'd fifty times rather see the child staying here and 
doing her typewriting than embarking on such a gimcrack 
nonsensical scheme. Trying to sell faked warming-pans to 
a lot of, cads and old women ! ' 

At this moment the door flew open and Evelyn joined 
them, breathless. The little room was completely full now, 
and Miss Matfield wanted to escape, to let them* talk it out 
together, but she could not manage it unless she pushed 
Evelyn out of the way. 

'I 've been talking to mother/ Evelyn began. 

The Major jumped up. ‘ Don't tell me she 's still trying 
to persuade you to bury yourself among her fenders and 
warming-pans and go smirking behind a counter. It 's 
the most preposterous idea I ever heard of. It won't even 
pay. All good money thrown away.' I 

'Oh, I don't know about that, father,' Evelyn protested. 
'Mother really does know a lot about antiques! I know 
that. I wouldn't be surprised if she didn't make quite a 
lot out of it.' 

Neither of them took any notice of Miss Matfield, but 
nevertheless she could not very well leave the room until 
she had a good opportunity to push past Evelyn. 

‘Your mother may or may not know a good deal about 
antiques/ said the Major very impressively, 'though I 
seem to remember her being taken in every day or so by 
some piece of faked-up rubbish. But she knows nothing 
whatever about human nature and has no head for business. 
And if you 're going to keep a shop, my child, you have to 
know something about human nature and business. Now 
I could keep a shop and make a success out of it, if I wanted 
to, because I understand people and know how to organize. 
Your mother knows no more about organization than a — a 
prize rabbit.' 

'Well, listen to me, father, and never mincl about that. 
I 've been talking it over with mother, and I '11 tell you 
what I 've decided to do. I 'm coming with you on this 
trip — and, by the way, you '11 have to give me some money 
for clothes, I haven't a thing — and then afterwards, if I 
don't like it, I shall try mother's scheme, if the shop 's still 
in existence/ 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


174 

‘It won't be. But that doesn't matter. This is good 
news, Evelyn. Just the two of us, side by side ' 

It looked as if a magnificent parental embrace were 
arriving. Miss Matfield, murmuring something about let- 
ters, slipped out. The Ansdells were absurd, all three of 
them, but she could not help envying Evelyn. Major 
Ansdell might be ridiculous, but if he had asked her to go 
roaming round the Empire with him, she would have 
accepted like a shot. As it was, she stayed on in Angel 
Pavement and at the Burpenfield, and would soon have 
lost an amusing Club neighbour too, almost the only one 
left with whom she could be friendly and confidential. 
Foul. 

The late post had arrived and there were two letters 
for her. One was from her mother and was merely the 
regular hasty bulletin. Dad was working too hard as 
usual, looking after everybody for miles around except 
himself, and not looking at all well. The Wesleys' little 
girl was down with pneumonia. Those new people, the 
Milfords, the elderly people who had taken Rogerson's old 
house, had a son and his wife home from India, quite nice. 
There was no chance of her getting up to town this next 
month but dad said he might have to come up and would 
let her know in good time. And when did Lilian think she 
could manage another week-end at home ? Oh — and Mary 
Femhill, the quite plain one who went out to South Africa 
last year and came back so suddenly, well, she was engaged. 
There was nothing very exciting in all that. Just the 
usual stuff. Poor mother, poor dad! He did work too 
hard, and he was beginning to have a terribly pinched look. 
That was the trouble about being a doctor, you never 
bothered, went on until you dropped. That was pretty 
foul too. There didn't seem to be much good luck going in 
life, and what there was completely escaped the Matfield 
family. 

The other letter was more interesting, and she kept it 
until she reached her own room again. It was dated from 
the Chestervem Agricultural College: 

Dear Lilian , 

I have to be in London to-morrow (the 16/A) and am wonder- 
ing if you would care to spend the evening with me, have 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 175 

dinner and then go somewhere . It would he a great treat for 
me . I *m sorry the notice is so short , but couldn't help that. 
Will you let me know at once — cjo Holhorn Palace Hotel — and 
tell me what time to call for you if you are free . 

Yours sincerely , 

Norman Birtley. 

So Norman Birtley hadn't forgotten her existence. She 
sent a dashing note to him at his rather ghastly Holborn 
Palace Hotel, telling him she was free and could be called 
for at the Burpenfield at seven o’clock. And after slipping 
out to post it, she felt slightly better. 

Ansdell looked in, having disposed of her father, not 
without first making him promise her a new outfit. ‘And 
we sail in a fortnight, my dear,* she crowed. ‘And to- 
morrow I give those beastly people the sack, after which I 
hand out the same to Tatters, in person too. Yes, I am. 
That will probably close the dear old Burp to me for ever, 
and not a bad thing too. Except I shall be very sorry to 
leave you, Mattie. I will really. After all, wte've had 
some great conferences in these queer little dens, haven’t 
we? I ’ll have to tell father he must have two secretaries, 
and then we ’ll both go out, slip away and marry big brown 
men from the West and the great open spaces. What do 
you say ? * 

'I ’d love it,’ said Miss Matfield, forcing a smile. *1 'm 
terribly sorry you ’re going. They ’ll put some awful 
creature into your room, either one of the old hot water 
brigade or some devastatingly bright young person from 
the lounge set. I suppose it ’s nearly time I joined the hot 
water school, the kettle fillers ’ 

‘Don’t be absurd. You 're one of the very few people 
here who are really alive — and look it. Let ’s change 
the subject. I believe it ’s depressing you. Had any 
letters?' 

‘One from mother, very dull, and one from a man I 've 
known off and on for years. He ’s coming up to town to- 
morrow and wants me to spend the evening with him, 
seeing the sights.' 

' A-ha! Is he a big brown man? Do you like him? ’ 

‘He 's not bad/ Miss Matfield replied, indifferently. 'A 
bit feeble. He 's from my part of the world and used to 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


176 

hang about a lot at one time, but we haven’t seen much ot 
one another for ages.' 

‘ I scent a roam-a-ance,’ cried Miss Ansdell. ‘ His sweet- 
heart when a boy. And you have cared all these yee-ars 
and I never knew ’ 

' Don’t be an ape. You 're making me feel sick.’ 

'But seriously, Mattie. Is he going to ask you to 
marry him, after the coffee has been served in a shaded 
comer? ' 

Miss Matfield smiled, but thought this over. ‘He might, 
you know,’ she admitted, staring into nothing, her eyes 
growing sombre. ‘And if I thought I was doomed to stay 
in this place much longer, spending my evenings washing 
stockings and pattering round with kettles, I ’d marry him 
next week. But I haven’t the least desire to marry him. 
He 's quite decent, but — oh — he 's just rather feeble. Most 
young men seem rather feeble, these days. I suppose most 
of the other sort were killed in the war. I hate feeble men, 
don’t you ? I mean, I like a man to have plenty of charac- 
ter, a solid lump of it, and I don’t even care if it isn’t a 
terribly good character so long as there 's plenty of it. 
There ’s a man in my office ’ 

‘You don’t mean Mr. Dirty — Dersy — what’s it?’ Miss 
Ansdell asked. 

‘No. He ’s rather sloppy too. Not a bit amusing. But 
there 's a man who ’s just come lately, Golspie ' 

‘I know. But you said he was awful.’ 

‘So he is,’ Miss Matfield admitted hastily. ‘I told you 
about him, didn’t I ? I don’t say I like him. He ’s rather 
a brute, and looks it, or at any rate looks weird. But he 
has got some character, and could do something without 
asking everybody’s permission. That 's all I meant. Of 
eourse, from every other point of view, even poor Norman 
Birtley, who really isn’t so bad, is worth fifty of him. 
Imagine going out to dinner with Golspie I' And die 
laughed aloud at the thought. 

They talked of other things, yawned, stared, talked again, 
more idly, yawned again, and then went to bed. 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 


177 


hi 

Miss Matfield awoke next morning with a vague feeling 
that something pleasant and rather exciting was about to 
happen. Norman Birtley. So that was it. She could 
think of nothing else, and was rather disappointed, slightly 
cross with herself, when it all dwindled to Norman. That 
showed the sort of existence she led, these days. There 
had been a time when Norman Birtley was only a joke. 
When he became serious she had brushed him aside. After 
that, when he turned into the attentive admirer, popping 
up at odd intervals and popping down again wistfully, it is 
true she had liked him better. But now, the very thought 
of an evening with him could bring her out of sleep in 
a vague sense of excitement. It was absurd. It was. 
pathetic. No, it was simply revolting. 

Before she reached the office, she had completely re- 
versed this judgment. There was nothing revolting about 
it. Perfectly right and natural. Norman Birtley was 
quite decent; he liked her, admired her, perhaps was in 
love with her; and she had every right to look forward to- 
an evening with him, to an evening out witn anybody 
(except girls from the club, sharing pit seats and sand- 
wiches), for that matter. The 13 bus, grinding away 
through the slight fog, agreed with this conclusion, hinted 
that she was too proud, and seemed to say that for its part 
it took all it could get, like the stout-hearted Cockney it 
was. There was some fog too in the City, and it was a raw 
yellow morning for Angel Pavement. Everybody in the 
office yawned a good deal and was rather irritable for the 
first two hours. It was that sort of morning. The rest of 
the day was more comfortable, but dull and slow, lumbering 
towards five-thirty like a stupefied elephant. Miss Matfield 
had not much to do. Mr. Golspie was out all day, and it 
was he who usually kept her busy. Mr. Dersingham, who 
found himself getting pink and flustered when Miss Matfield 
coolly stared at him and waited, with a kind of ironic 
resignation, for the next halting sentence, preferred ta 
dictate his letters, whenever possible, to little Poppy Sellers, 
in whose eyes, as he rightly suspected, he was a large fine 
gentleman. The only amusing thing that happened in the 
afternoon was that poor Mr. Smeeth, returning importantly 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


178 

and fussily from the bank, tried to tell them a funny story 
he had heard there and completely failed to bring out the 
point. He was rather pathetic, Mr. Smeeth. After that 
there were huge blank spaces, during which yellow wisps 
of fog seemed to creep into one's mind. But she was able 
to get away early and have a really good Burpenfield bath, 
tons of hot water, before changing. 

She was quite ready when the message came that Mr. 
Birtley was waiting below. In the corridor she ran into 
Kersey, one of the depressing old inhabitants who, as 
usual, was trailing along with a kettle. She meant well 
— poor old thing — but she had a horrid trick of saying 
things that depressed you at once. 

'Hello, Matfield,’ she droned damply. 'Going out, are 
you ? That ’s the way. Y ou have to enjoy yourself some- 
times, haven’t you? That 's right, dee-ar.’ 

This was Kersey's usual speech if she saw that you were 
dressed to go out. She had another speech ready for you 
if she saw you were not dressed. 'Not going out to-night, 
eh, Matfield? No, I thought not. Well, you can’t ex- 
pect to go out every night, can you, dee-ar?’ And you 
left her drooping there, with her kettle, but not before she 
had set your spirits drooping too, whether you were stay- 
ing in or going out. It was as if the horrible future 
addressed a few remarks to you. 

Norman Birtley was waiting in the lounge, looking very 
tall, very awkward, very uncomfortable. Round the fire 
was the usual set, two or three of the bright young ones 
with Ingleton-Dodd lounging in the middle of them. 
Ingletoa-Dodd was a large woman, about forty, with a 
curious white face, her hair plastered back, severe mannish 
clothes, and a bass voice. She seemed to have more 
money than anybody else in the Club, and owned quite 
a good little car, about which she talked a great deal. She 
was talking about it, or about some car, when Miss Mat- 
field walked in. 

'Oh, the man was a complete fool,’ she was saying, in 
that deep bass voice of hers. ' I told him to have a look 
at the mag. "Put the mag right,’’ I told him, "and the 
whole thing will be right. Clean those points a bit, to 
start with." By this time, he 'd taken the mag out and 
was staring at it like a stuck pig.* 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 179 

'Marvellous! 1 cried one of the bright children. They 
all thought Ingleton-Dodd 'the very last word.* 

'"Oh, give it to me," I said, and snatched it out of his 
hand. Then I sent for the manager. “Look here/' I 
said to him, "does anybody in this place know how to 
time a mag? ” You should have seen his face/ 

Awful creature! She ought to have seen Norman 
Birtley's face. He was looking at Ingleton-Dodd with 
fascinated repulsion written clearly on his simple and ex- 
pressive features. He greeted Miss Matfield confusedly, 
dropping his hat when he shook hands. His hands were 
hot and damp, and there was a glint of perspiration on his 
pink forehead. He had not changed at all, except that 
he now wore rimless eyeglasses and his sandy moustache 
was a trifle more in evidence. He was only a year or so 
older than Miss Matfield and, as he was far less sophisti- 
cated than she was, not at all at home in London, which 
he only visited at long intervals, she felt the older of 
the two. 5 

' How are you, Lilian ? ' he inquired, smiling nervously. 
'You 're looking very well.' 

‘ Am I ? I don’t feel it. I'm feeling pretty foul.' 

'You're not, are you?* He looked at her anxiously. 
'What's wrong? You haven't got anything the matter 
with you, have you? Are you seeing a doctor? ' 

This obvious concern ought to have pleased her, for it 
was very flattering. But these questions, demanding as 
they did a definite answer, a disease or two, only irri- 
tated her. It was understood at the Burpenfield that 
you were nearly always pretty foul, with nothing exactly 
wrong with you perhaps, but nevertheless in a fairly per- 
manent state of being worn out, nerve-racked, tottering 
on the brink of something ghastly. Miss Matfield had 
forgotten that this simple visitor from the country knew 
nothing of this convention. 

'Oh, I ’m all right really, I suppose,' she replied, dis- 
missing the subject. 'Shall we go now? Where do you 
propose to take me, Norman? Have you any plans?' 
She moved to the door. 

'Well, I didn't know exactly what to do. I suppose I 
ought to have asked you first, but there wasn't time. 
There seems to be a rather good show on at the Colladium 

G 93* 



180 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

this week, so I got two seats for that, second house. Do 
you like music halls?' 

'Not bad. It all depends.' 

* A fellow I was talking to at the hotel said it was a very 
good show, so I thought that would be all right. But if 
you don't want to go, I suppose I can get rid of the tickets, 
can't I? ' 

'No, that will be all right. I 'd like to go,' she told him. 
They were walking down the hill now, towards Finchley 
Road. 

'Good. And about dinner,' he continued, struggling 
laboriously with his duties as host. ‘I thought we might 
go to a place in Soho. Old Warwick — he 's our principal at 
the Chestervern Agricultural, and he 's been here a good 
deal — told me there was a good little place, one of those 
French or Italian places, you know, a bit Bohemian but 
very good cooking — I 've got the name and address in my 
book and I '11 find it in a minute. Anyhow, I thought, if 
you didn't mind, we might go there.' 

'AH right,' she replied, not very enthusiastically. Some 
of these little Soho places were rather foul, and old Warwick 
of the Chestervern Agricultural might not be a very good 
judge. 'Let 's go there, and you can dig out the name 
and address on the way. We '11 hurry and catch a bus.' 

'Oh, will a bus be all right? ' he cried, obviously relieved. 
'I thought perhaps we might have to take a taxi.' 

'No, a bus will do,' she told him. A taxi, though, would 
have done a great deal better. She loved riding in taxis. 
Perhaps — who knows? — if Mr. Birtley had insisted upon 
their having a taxi, the whole evening might have been 
different. 

Once again she went jogging down the hill, past the 
sudden sparkle of Swiss Cottage, the genteel gloom of St. 
John's Wood, and a Baker Street that was now like a 
series of captivating peepshows. They did not talk much 
inside the bus, which was full and uncommonly noisy, 
but he shouted a few questions about the Club and Ingle- 
ton-Dodd (whom he regarded with horror) and the office 
and her father and mother, and she screamed fairly ad- 
equate if brief replies. Her spirits rose when they actually 
arrived in Soho, for though she had some mournful memo- 
ries of its table d'h 6 te, and had been in London long enough 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 181 

to be sceptical about its romantic bohemianism, she could 
not resist the place itself, the glimpses of foreign interiors, 
the windows filled with outlandish food-stuffs, Chianti 
flasks, and bundles of long cheroots, the happy foolish 
little decorations, the strange speech, the dark faces, the 
girls leaning out of the first floor windows. It was quite 
a Jong time since she had last walked along Old Compton 
Street. It made her sigh for an adventure. Meanwhile, 
that very evening took on a faint colouring of adventure 
while they were still searching for old Warwick's restaur- 
ant, though, with all the good will in the world, she 
could not transform Norman Birtley, fresh from the 
Chestervem Agricultural College, into a romantic and 
adventurous companion. 

At last, they found old Warwick's restaurant. It might 
have been French or Italian or even Spanish or Hungarian; 
there was no telling; but it was determinedly foreign in a 
denationalized fashion, rather as if the League of Nations 
had invented it. No sooner was Norman's "hand on the 
door than a very fierce-looking, moustachioed, square- 
jawed Latin flung it open very quickly and with a flourish, 
so that they were almost sucked in. The place was very 
small, rather warm, and smelt of oil. The lights were 
shaded with coloured crinkly paper. There were only 
four other people there, two oldish tired girls masticating 
rather hopelessly in the far comer, and a queer middle- 
aged couple sitting almost in the window. The fierce 
Latin swept them across to a tiny table, thrust menus into 
their hands, rubbed his hands, changed all the cutlery 
round and then put it back again, rubbed his hands once 
more and then suddenly lost all interest in them, as if his 
business was simply to drag people in and then, having 
got them seated, to create a momentary illusion of brisk 
service before they had time to change their minds. 

'You can have the whole dinner for three and sixpence,' 
said Norman, looking up from his menu. 'Wonderful how 
they do it in these places, isn't it? I mean to say, what 
would you get in an English restaurant for that ? Nothing 
worth eating, I '11 bet. But these foreigners can do it. Of 
course, it 's their job. They know how to cook. Shall 
we have the dinner ? 9 

Miss Matfield thought they might, and looked about her. 



182 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


not very hopefully, while Norman gave the order to a wait- 
ress, a very tall fat girl with a chalky face and no features, 
who had just appeared. The queer middle-aged couple 
looked queerer still now, for the man appeared to be dyed 
and the woman enamelled and it was incredible that they 
should ever eat food at all. You felt they ought to feed 
on wood and paint. 

Having given the order, Mr. Birtley was now looking 
about him too, and when he had finished doing this and 
had obviously noted the more picturesque details for the 
benefit of the other members of the staff of the Chester- 
vem Agricultural College, he beamed at her through his 
rimless eyeglasses. 'Nothing I enjoy better than study- 
ing these queer types/ he whispered. 'A place like this 
is a treat to me, if only for that reason. Old Warwick 
told me I 'd enjoy that part of it. He 's had some very 
funny experiences in his time. I must try to remember 
some of the yams he 's told me, once or twice when I 've 
been sitting up with him over a pipe at the Chestervem/ 

While Miss Matfield was asking idly what sort of man 
Mr. Warwick was and Norman was telling her, the wait- 
ress had brought them the two halves of a grape fruit, the 
juice of which had apparently been used some time before. 
They had not finished with old Warwick, who seemed to 
Miss Matfield a silly old man, when the waitress returned 
to give them some mysterious thick soup, which looked 
like gum but had a rather less pronounced flavour. 

Miss Matfield tried three spoonfuls and then looked with 
horror at her plate. Something was there, something 
small, dark, squashed. There were legs. She pushed the 
plate away. 

'What 's the matter, Lilian? Don't you like the soup? ' 

She pointed with her spoon at the alien body. 

Mr. Birtley leaned across and peered at it through his 
glasses. 4 No, by George, it isn't, is it? Is it really ? Oh, 
I say, that 's not good enough, is it? That 's the worst 
of these foreigners. Do you think I ought to tell them 
about it? ' 

‘If you don't, I will,' said Miss Matfield indignantly. 
'Absolutely revolting!' 

But there was nobody to tell. Even the fierce Latin 
had disappeared. It seemed as if when soup was served, 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 183 

the whole staff hid in the kitchen. Miss Matfield was sure 
now that her first instinctive disapproval had been right, 
as usual. This was a foul little place. Unfortunately, 
she was really hungry, having had a very small lunch. 

The next member of the staff they did see obviously 
could not be blamed for the soup, for he was the wine 
waiter, an ancient gloomy foreigner. He padded across 
to Mr. Birtley, who was trying not very successfully to 
explain a very funny thing that had happened last term 
at the College, held out a wine list decorated with dirty 
thumb marks, and waited apathetically. 

‘A-ha!* cried Mr. Birtley jovially. ‘Let's have some- 
thing to drink, shall we ? Do you think we could manage 
a whole bottle. I think we could. Yes, let 's have a whole 
bottle. Now then, what is there? Will you have red or 
white wine, Lilian ? It *s all the same to me.' 

4 1 *d like red, I think,* she replied. ‘ Burgundy perhaps.' 
It was more sustaining. After all, with bre^d and butter 
and some burgundy, it might be possible to stun one’s 
appetite. She had no hopes of the dinner. 

'Burgundy it is,' cried Mr. Birtley, with the air of a reck- 
less musketeer. 'All right, then. A bottle of Number 
Eleven. Beaune.* 

'You geef me moanay,' murmured the ancient foreigner. 

'Righto. Money. There you are.* And then he gave 
Miss Matfield a wink and smiled at her. She smiled back, 
softening towards him a little, for he was so obviously 
enjoying himself and thinking it all so wonderful. Poor 
Norman ! 

'You ought to come and see us at the College next time 
you're home, Lilian,* he said. 'You'd like it. We've 
got one or two amusing fellows on the staff, and the stu- 
dents aren’t a bad crowd. We have little dances some- 
times, and tennis in the summer. It 's growing too. In 
a year or two, if I can scrape up some money, I may get a 
partnership. Not bad, ehl The fact is,' and he lowered 
his voice, as if to keep these confidences away from the 
waitress, who had just deposited some microscopic pieces 
of fish in front of them and was still standing near, as if to 
see if they would have the audacity to eat them/ the fact 
is, I get on better with old Warwick than any of the other 
fellows. He 's taken rather a fancy to me, thinks I 've 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


184 

got more drive than the others. And as a matter of fact/ 
he added, looking earnestly at her, ‘I have. And I wish 
you *d come and look me up down there.* 

She said she would, if she could manage it, and then ex- 
plained, while the ancient foreigner poured out the wine, 
how difficult it was to do all one wanted to do, what with 
one thing and another, and then, fortified by the burgundy 
and determined to drive old Warwick out of the conver- 
sation for a time, she went on to tell him more about the 
office and the Club. He listened attentively, though with 
just the faintest suggestion of patronage. Obviously he 
thought a good deal more of himself these days, now that 
he had made such a hit with his old Warwick of the Chester- 
vem Agricultural. But then all men were alike in that: 
they all thought they were marvellous. However, she 
cduld tell from the way he looked at her that he still thought 
she was marvellous too, which was very pleasant. She 
could feel herself getting steadily better looking and more 
attractive. 

This could not be said about the dinner. The cliicken 
was not marvellous, was not even pleasant. Like many 
other places in Soho, this restaurant evidently had a con- 
tract that compelled it to accept only those parts of a 
chicken that could not be called breast, wing, or leg. It 
specialized in cliicken skin. The salad could be eaten, but 
its green-stuff seemed to have been grown in some London 
back garden behind a sooty privet hedge. The sweet was 
composed of a very small ice, the paper in which it had 
been delivered from the van at the back door, and some 
coloured water that might have been part of the ice two 
hours before. That was the dinner, a miserable affair. 
Even Norman seemed to have a suspicion that it had not 
been very good, but he did not apologize for it, perhaps out 
of loyalty to old Warwick. Miss Matfield, in despair, had 
had two full glasses of the burgundy, a raw and potent 
concoction, which had produced at once a rather muzzy 
effect in her mind so that everything seemed a little larger 
and noisier than usual. Once, just before the coffee, she 
had found herself wanting to giggle at the thought of 
Norman taking his sandy moustache back to Chestervem 
and old Warwick. The coffee, black and bitter, stopped 
all that nonsense. They smoked a cigarette together over 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 185 

it, and Norman, with tiny beads of perspiration on his 
ruddy forehead and his glasses slightly misty, talked about 
old times and smiled sentimentally across the cruet at her. 

It was time to be gone. The Latin suddenly decided 
to notice their existence again, brought the bill, accepted 
money, proffered change, swept away the tip, and then 
apparently threw them both into the street, where the air 
seemed at once remarkably pure and unusually cold. They 
arrived at the Colladium just at the right moment, a few 
minutes after the doors had been opened for the second 
house. The place was, as usual, besieged by a mob of 
pleasure seekers who all looked like demons in the red glare 
of the lights at the entrance. Norman led the way, a 
little uncertainly, and they went swarming down thick- 
carpeted corridors. 

'Didn't that man say “Round to the left and up the 
stairs”? ' Miss Matfield asked. She had a slight headache 
now. Those peculiar red lights outside the Cfclladium look 
exactly like a headache, and perhaps they had inspired the 
burgundy. 'I 'm sure he did, you know.' 

‘I didn't hear him,' replied Norman, not too amiably. 
He was somewhat fussed. 'Talking to somebody else, 
p'raps.' 

Feeling a little dubious, she followed him down the 
gangway on the ground floor of the auditorium, which 
looked as if it were recovering from a fire, there was so much 
smoke about. There were programme girls showing people 
to their seats, but you had to wait your turn and Norman, 
anxious to secure his two beautiful seats, would not wait 
his turn. He marched on, glancing at his tickets and the 
lettered rows of stalls, then finally found the row he 
wanted, and they pushed past a few people, sought and 
found the right numbers, and sank into their seats. 

‘This is all right, isn't it? ' said Norman, after breathing 
a sigh of relief. ' Jolly good seats, eh ? ' He looked round 
triumphantly. More lights were being turned on; the 
orchestra was beginning to tune up again; and the place 
was filling rapidly. Miss Matfield's headache retreated, 
dwindled to an occasional twinge. 

'What about a programme? ' said Norman, and began to 
make vague, fussy, ineffectual signs. 

Then two large determined men, coarse-looking fellows 



186 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

with heavy jowls and cigars stuck in the comer of their 
insensitive mouths, came pushing down the row. They 
stopped when they came to Mr. Birtley and Miss Matfield. 
'Here, I say,* the first one called back to the programme 
girl, after looking at his ticket, ‘is this the right row? * Ap- 
parently it was, for now he turned his attention to Norman. 

' I think you 're sitting in the wrong seats, my friend/ he 
said, not unpleasantly. 

‘I don't think so/ replied Norman, rather sharply. He 
brought out his own tickets and gave them a reassuring 
glance. 

‘Well, I do/ said the other. He had a loud voice, the 
kind of voice that attracts attention. ‘Row F, fourteen 
and fifteen. Isn't that right? Well, those are my seats, 
bought and paid for. Ask the girl. She sent us here.' 

'I don't see that/ said Norman stiffly. ‘Mine are Row 
F, fourteen and fifteen. And we were here first. They 
must have made a mistake at the box office.' 

Miss Matfield had risen from her seat. People were 
looking round at them. If there was anything she hated, 
it was this stupid sort of scene. 

The second large determined man, who had nothing like 
the amount of room to stand in his bulk demanded and 
deserved, now made a number of impatient noises. These 
noises goaded his friend into more direct action. 

‘Here, come on,' he said roughly, 'let *s have a look at 
your tickets. Here are mine. Now let *s have a look at 
yours/ He almost snatched them out of Norman's hand. 
The instant he saw them, he cried triumphantly: ‘There 
y' are. Balcony Stalls, Bal-cony Stalls. These aren't 
Balcony Stalls. Cor! — you *re in the wrong part of the 
theatre, boy, in the wrong part of the theatre.' 

'Wouldjer believe it!* cried the second man contemp- 
tuously. 

'Cor! Up there you want to be, right up there, boy.* 

‘Sorry. I didn't know.* Poor Norman was very flus- 
tered now. Miss Matfield might have been sorry for him, 
but she wasn't. She was furious. Even after they had 
left the seats and were pushing their way back to the 
gangway, the two brutes were still talking about it and 
laughing and making contemptuous noises. Then as she 
arrived, scarlet, in the gangway, she ran into a little party 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 187 

of three that was waiting to be shown to its place. The 
first was a tall man with a bristling moustache, obviously a 
foreigner; the second was a youngish girl, very smart and 
pretty; and the third, who was still interviewing the girl 
with the chocolates, was — yes, no other — Mr. Golspie, 
rather flushed, very jovial. There was some congestion in 
this part of the gangway ; they had to stop; and he looked 
up and saw her. 

'Evening, Miss Matfield,* he said, grinning at her in his 
usual fashion. ‘ So this is where we come, is it ? * 

She stammered something. 

‘ Had a good day at the office? You 'll see me there to- 
morrow. Half a minute, Lena. Well, Miss Matfield, see 
you enjoy yourself. Here, take one of these.' 

She found one of the boxes of chocolates in her hand. 
Before she could do anything or even say anything, he had 
given her another of his vast grins and had turned away. 
As she followed Norman up the gangway most of the lights 
were lowered and the overture blared out. Their seats 
were in the first tier and by the time they found them, the 
curtain had risen and the stage was occupied by three very 
grave young men who were busy throwing one another 
about. 

'That was a bit of a mix-up, wasn't it?' said Norman, 
when they had settled themselves. 'But it wasn't really 
my fault. They should give their seats proper names. 
I 've never heard of stalls being up here.' 

'Well, you might have asked. I told you what that 
man said.' 

'By George, so you did. Sorry! But, I say, who was 
that rum looking chap you were talking to down there? ' 

‘He 's a man who 's just joined the firm I 'm working 
with. I do his letters.' 

'Didn't he give you that box of chocolates? ' 

'Yes, he did. As a matter of fact, he just shoved it into 
my hand.' 

'Funny thing to do,' Norman continued, half resentfully. 
‘What did he want to do that for? ' 

'I don't know. You 'd better ask him.' She stared at 
the three young men, who were now climbing on to piles 
of chairs and tables in order to throw one another a greater 
distance. 



1 88 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

‘ I must say I didn't like the look of him very much. ' 

'That's sad, isn't it, Norman?' replied Miss Matfield. 
‘Hadn't you better call at the office to-morrow morning 
and tell him so? What had I better do? Get another 
job?' 

'You don't mean to tell me you like that chap? * 

'I don't know whether I do or not,' she told him, with 
perfect truth. But her voice betrayed irritation. 'It 
doesn't matter, anyhow. I '11 admit, though,' she added, 
more amiably, ' that he does look a bit weird. But he *s 
rather amusing. Have one of his chocolates, seeing that 
they 're here, and don't talk so much.' 

The subject was dropped and when they talked again, 
as they did at odd moments throughout the performance, 
Mr. Golspie was not mentioned. The show itself was 
neither better nor worse than the others she had seen there. 
She liked the white-faced clown with the squeaky voice 
who nearly fell into the orchestra pit, and the two men 
who got involved in the most passionate argument all 
about nothing, and the Spanish dancers, and the wildly 
ridiculous schoolmaster. On the other hand, she did not 
like the American cross-talking and dancing pair or the 
two girls who sang at the piano or the various acrobats 
and trick cyclists. Norman, who soon recovered from 
the ticket scene and settled down to enjoy himself, to like 
as much as he could of the show and to patronize the rest, 
was rather more human than he had been during the 
misery of dinner. Old Warwick was banished at last, 
and the dull shade of Chestervem never fell on the talk. 

When they came out of the Colladium into the aston- 
ishing sanity of the night, and Norman not only suggested 
a taxi but actually found one, she felt she was beginning 
to feel friendly towards him again. And if he had said, 

' You know, Lilian, I am rather feeble and a bit of an ass, 
and I know you 're marvellous and far above my style, 
but I 've been in love with you a jolly long time and still 
am, honestly I am, worse than ever in fact, so will you 
marry me? I'm not doing anything very wonderful, I 
know, and you might easily find it dull at first down at 
Chestervem, but we 'd have some fun and things would 
get better all the time'; if he had said something like that, 
m the proper tone of voice — rather wistful — and with a 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 189 

dumbly devoted look in his eyes, she felt there was no 
telling what she might reply. She could just see herself 
marrying him. 

But he made no such speech, and was clearly not in that 
dumbly devoted mood at all. All the way home, he was 
vaguely sentimental — what fun they 'd had in the old 
tennis club days and what good pals they 'd been ! — and 
was timidly amorous, like some faint-hearted Don Juan 
taking one home from a dance. Unluckily, Miss Matfield 
was not sentimental, at least not on conventional or Christ- 
mas card lines, and she heartily despised and disliked the 
timidly amorous male, who could not let one alone but 
had not passion enough, or courage, to make him risk a 
sound snubbing. He would slip an arm round her waist 
and she would tell him to take it away because it was un- 
comfortable, as indeed it was. And then he would say, 
4 Ah, Lilian, you 're not very kind to me,' in a ridiculous 
mooing voice, like a farm-hand trying to ape the artful 
philanderer. It was all terribly irritating. When at last, 
as the taxi began grinding up the last hilly half mile, she 
was so tired of this that she actually asked him questions 
about his prospects at Chestervern, dropping into the part 
of the cool interested woman friend with a sound business 
head, he turned rather sulky and answered her in a poor 
half-hearted fashion. 

‘I suppose I can get a bus back?' he said as they 
stood at the entrance to the Burpenfield and the taxi 
departed. 

4 Oh, yes, of course. Just at the bottom there, on the 
Finchley Road. They run until after twelve, and they 're 
much quicker at this time of night, too. You 're going 
back to-morrow, aren't you? # 

4 Yes, on the 10.20. I suppose I 'd better be getting 
along now. Rather cold standing here, isn't it? ' 

‘Well, Norman,' she said, trying to look bright and 
friendly and not ungrateful, 4 it's been nice seeing you 
again. And thanks awfully for the dinner and every- 
thing. I adored that clown with the chairs, didn't you? 
Good-bye.' 

He shook hands. 4 Good-bye. I 'm glad you liked it,' 
he muttered. 4 Good-bye.' 

She stood in the entrance a minute or two after he had 



190 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

gone, fumbling for her key, and suddenly from that great 
ocean of deep depression which she always felt was not far 
away, rose in the dark a great breaker and swept her away. 
She could have cried. It was not Norman Birtley — he 
was a feeble fool who was rapidly getting worse — but the 
endless cheating of life itself that frightened her and 
stifled her. She was Lilian Matfield, Lilian Matfield, the 
same that had gone playing and laughing and singing and 
looking forward to everything only a few years ago, no 
different now except a little older and more sensible, and 
yet she felt, obscurely, darkly, that somehow she was being 
conjured into somebody miserably different, somebody stiff 
and faded and dull. 

Another girl came up. Miss Matfield steadied herself, 
found her key, and walked in. Isabel Cadnam was just 
coming out of the lounge, and they met. 

'Hello, Matfield. Been on the razzle? Look here, I 
hope you didn’t want that shawl I borrowed. I didn’t 
get in last night until the crack of dawn, and then I was in 
such a hurry this morning, I forgot about it.* 

' No, it didn’t matter, thanks, Caddie. I ’m going up. 
I 'm tired.' 

'So am I. Had a good night? That show that Ivor 
took me to last night was rather a wash-out, I must say. 
The most ghastly people, and millions of them. And 
Ivor wanted to join in with some of the ghastliest, and I 
didn’t, of course, and that started it all over again. An- 
other row, my dear. Isn't it foul ? ' 

Miss Matfield said dispiritedly that it was. 

'What did you do to-night, Matfield? Anything 
thrilling?' 

'Not very. Rather dull, in fact. I 've got a headache. 
I think I 've eaten too many chocolates. I ’ll try some 
aspirin.' 

'Nothing like it,’ said Miss Cadnam. "Look here, I '11 
fetch your shawl and bring it round, and then, if you have 
any to spare, I '11 borrow a couple of aspirins. If I don’t 
take something , I '11 never get a wink of sleep all night. It 's 
always the same after I 've had a row with Ivor. I begin 
arguing with him the minute I get to bed, and then I go on 
and on all night unti 1 think my head 's going to burst. 
Isn't it foutV 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 191 

‘Complete^/ said Miss Matfield, opening her door. 
‘All right, then. Hurry up with the shawl and I ’ll get 
you the aspirin.* She closed the door behind her. 


IV 

It was rather queer seeing Mr. Golspie again, in the grey 
light oi Angel Pavement, a r ter that strange meeting at the 
Colladium. It was rather like seeing someone you had just 
met in a vivid dream. She did some letters for him the 
next morning, and when he had finished them, he dropped 
his impersonal stare and tone of voice, grinned at her, and 
said: 'Enjoy the show last night? ' 

'Not very much,' she told him. 'Did you? 1 

'No, I didn't/ he boomed. 'Dead as mutton. Not a 
patch on the old halls. They call it Variety now, but that 's 
about all the variety you get. All the same; isn't it? I 
keep trying it, but it 's poor stuff. That girl Of mine likes 
to go. She enjoys it all right. Did you see her last night ? 
She was there with me.' 

' I wondered if it was your daughter. She 's awfully 
pretty, isn’t she? ' 

'Think so?' He was pleased at this. 'Well, she's 
pretty enough, and knows it, the little monkey. Was that 
the young man, the one I saw you with ? ' 

He really had some ghastly expressions. The young 
man! 'Good lord, no,' she cried. 'He was just an old 
friend who comes from my part of the world. Shall I bring 
these letters in to sign as soon as I 've done them? ' 

'I’d like them as soon as possible, Miss Matfield. I 
want to be off before lunch. I 've got several members of 
the Chosen Race to see this afternoon.' 

That was all. The awful ' young man * question was, of 
course, in his favourite vein, but apart from that, he was 
much quieter and pleasanter than usual in this little talk. 
For once he had dropped the jeering and leering style that 
made her feel so uncomfortable. He was friendlier. And 
she had never thanked him for the chocolates. She would 
have to do that when she went back with the letters. 

‘Oh, Mr. Golspie,' she cried, when he had finished signing 
the letters, 'I forgot to thank you for the lovely box of 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


192 

chocolates. I don't know why you gave them to me — so 
suddenly, like that ' 

'Just to celebrate the little meeting, that's all,' he 
replied, waving a hand. “Here's our Miss Matfield," I 
thought, “looking a bit uncomfortable because her young 
man 's landed in the wrong seats." ' 

'Oh, did you notice that? It was a stupid business.' 

‘Bit of a box-up, certainly,' he said, grinning at her. 
Yes, I saw you all right. You looked very annoyed, too. 
Anyhow, I thought something ought to be done about it.' 

'Well, it was very nice of you,' she said, though she was 
not altogether pleased at the turn the conversation had 
taken. 

‘Ah, but I 'm a very nice man,' he assured her, looking 
very solemn for a moment. Then he produced a short 
disconcerting guffaw, and waved his hand again. She 
turned away. ‘And another thing,' he called out. She 
stopped. 'You never catch me getting into the wrong 
seats. You try me sometime, Miss Matlield, you just try 
me. You 'd be surprised.' He chuckled a little as she 
went out. This time she felt hot and uncomfortable again, 
and felt ready to dislike him just as much as she had done 
when he first came. It was odd how uncomfortable he 
could make her feel. After all, she had worked for un- 
pleasant men before to-day. But this was rather different. 

Messrs. Twigg and Dersingham were now busy making 
what Mr. Dersingham, who was beginning to wear a look of 
great self-importance, called a 'big drive.' He and Mr. 
Golspie and the two travellers were visiting as many firms 
as they could, showing the new stuff that Mr. Golspie had 
introduced and piling up the orders. Apparently, it was 
important that as many orders as possible should be ob- 
tained during this little period, for some reason that was 
not made plain to the office staff, and perhaps was not 
plain to anybody but Mr. Golspie. It meant a great deal 
of work for everybody. Miss Matfield was kept at her 
machine nearly all day making out lists, invoices, and 
advices. It was not difficult work but it was rather close 
work and very dreary, and it left her fagged and feeling 
quite unfit to plan some amusement for herself. There 
were plenty of mildly amusing things that could be done 
with a little planning, but she was too tired to bother, like 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 193 

so many of the girls at the Club. Going anywhere, even if 
it was only attending a concert or doing a theatre, always 
meant so much fuss and arranging that she let it all slide, 
not excepting the week-end. If somebody had come along 
with a cut and dried plan for doing something entertaining, 
that would have been quite different, indeed heavenly; but 
nobody did. She spent a good deal of her time at the Club 
listening to Evelyn Ansdell, who was in the thick of her 
preparations for the Empire tour with the Major and 
talked a great length about every single thing she had to 
buy. Evelyn was quite amusing about it, of course, but it 
was distinctly depressing to think that very soon she would 
be gone, probably for ever. On the Sunday they both 
went round to have tea with Major Ansdell who was quite 
absurd and provided them with an enormous sticky tea — 
bless him! — but it was really all rather sad. And on 
Monday and Tuesday there was quite a frantic bustle at 
the office. Mr. Smeeth turned himself intp a faintly 
apologetic slave-driver, and Mr. Dersingham ran in and 
out like a large pink fox-terrier. 

The next morning they learned the reason for all this 
fuss. Mr. Smeeth, after visiting the private office, came 
back looking rather important, and said: 'Mr. Golspie's 
leaving us to-day.' 

Every one of them looked surprised, and three of them, 
Miss Matfield, Turgis, and Stanley, looked either startled or 
disappointed. 

‘He's not going for good, is he, Mr. Smeeth?' asked 
Turgis, before any one else could speak. 

He had spoken for Miss Matfield, who felt, she did not 
know why, the most acute anxiety. For some strange 
reason, which had certainly nothing to do with business, 
for at heart she did not care a rap whether Twigg and 
Dersingham sold all the veneers and inlays in England or 
drifted into bankruptcy, she hated the thought of Mr. 
Golspie leaving them. At one stroke it flattened the whole 
life of Angel Pavement. 

'He 's not going for good, I 'm glad to say,' Mr. Smeeth 
replied, enjoying their suspense. 'He 's only going back 
for a short visit, on our business, to the place he came 
from, up there in the Baltic. I don't know how long he '11 
be away. He doesn't know exactly himself yet. But he 's 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


194 

sailing this afternoon, going the whole way by boat on the 
Anglo-Baltic. And/ here Mr. Smeeth glanced out of the 
window at the raw damp morning, ‘I don't envy him. 
It 'll be a cold job crossing the North Sea, this weather. I 
remember I once had a sail on a boat at Yarmouth one 
Easter, not very far out, y' know, but — my word! — it was 
perishing. I was glad to get back. Well, what 's it going 
to be like right in the middle, this time of year? I wouldn't 
be paid, wouldn’t be paid, to do it.' 

*1 '11 bet he doesn't care,' said Stanley boastfully. Mr. 
Golspie was still one of Stanley's heroes — though nobody 
could discover why, except that he looked rather like a 
detective — and Stanley had no half measures in the heroic. 
‘I '11 bet he likes it. I would. I wish he'd take me with 
him. I wouldn’t go. Oh, no, oh, no! Wouldn't I just!' 

'You get on with your work, Stanley,' said Mr. Smeeth 
mechanically. 'We all know what you’d do and what 
you wouldn’t do. Well, he 's sailing this afternoon, all the 
way to the Baltic Sea, and, as I say, I don’t envy him.' 
And Mr. Smeeth returned, well content, to his cosy desk 
and his neat little rows of figures. 

Half an hour afterwards, Mr. Golspie, wearing an enor- 
mous ulster, looked in on them. ' You won’t see me for a 
week or two,' he announced cheerfully. 'Keep it going. 
Shoulders to the wheel ! Full steam ahead, as people say — 
though why they say it, God only knows, because nobody 
in a ship ever said it — doesn’t mean anything. Make 'em 
all pay up, Smeeth. Keep your eye on that cut rate with 
the Anglo-Baltic, Turgis. Just remember me in your 
prayers, you girls, if you do pray. Do you pray. Miss 
Matfield? Never mind, tell me another time. And, 
Stanley ' 

‘Yes, sir/ said Stanley, springing to attention. 

‘ Run down and get me a taxi, sharp as you can. Good- 
bye, everybody.' 

When they had all said good-bye, too, and he had gone 
and they had heard the outer door slam behind him, in the 
sudden quiet that followed, the whole office had appeared 
to shrink and darken a little. Miss Matfield, aware of this, 
resented it, and, compressing her lips, threw herself into 
what work she had on hand with a sort of grey determina- 
tion, never looking up and only speaking when compelled 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 195 

to answer a question. By lunch time she felt so discon- 
tented that, instead of spending the usual ninepence or so 
at the little teashop not far away, she went further afield, 
to a superior place just off Cannon Street, and had cutlet 
and peas, apple tart and cream, and a cup of coffee, paying 
her half-crown manfully. After that she was more cheerful 
and more honest. She had been depressed because though 
all kinds of things seemed to be happening to other people, 
nothing was happening to her. It was hard luck losing 
Evelyn Ansdell. It was hard luck losing Mr. Golspie, if 
only for a week or two. She could not say yet whether she 
reaily liked the man, but at least he made Angel Pavement 
more amusing. It would be terribly flat without him. 
Everything, it seemed, was sinking into dullness. Well, 
she must make an effort and think of something amusing 
to do. When she returned to the office, quarter of an hour 
late, as usual, she was cheerful and comparatively friendly 
with everybody. 

Perhaps the little gods who look after these minor affairs 
decided that she must be encouraged, for at once they 
found something amusing for her to do. Shortly after 
three, Mr. Smeeth took a telephone message and then 
called Miss Matfield to him. 

‘That was Mr. Golspie, Miss Matfield/ he began, in his 
pleasantly fussy and important way. * He says they 're 
sailing later than he thought, about five or so, and he 
wants you to go down to the ship and take down a few 
important letters he 's just remembered about. And 
you 've also got to take that sample book — it 's in the 
private office — he forgot it. I haven't got Mr. Dersing- 
ham's permission for you to go, and I can't get it, because 
he 's out, but of course it 's all right. I accept all responsi- 
bility. You don't mind going, do you? ' 

'I'd love it/ cried Miss Matfield. ‘But where exactly 
do I go? * 

Mr. Smeeth adjusted his eyeglasses and then examined 
the slip of paper he had been carrying. ‘You go to Hay's 
Wharf, that 's on the south side of the river between London 
Bridge and the Tower Bridge, you go over London Bridge 
and turn straight to the left to get there. And the ship's 
the L-e-m-m-a-l-a, Lemmata. Can you remember that, 
Miss Matfield? And he says, “Take a taxi" — so I'd 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


196 

better give you half a crown out of the petty cash for that — 
I *11 have to put it down as travelling expenses. Now you 
get your note-book and pencil and your things on, and I 'll 
get that sample book out of the private office for you. It '11 
be a little jaunt for you, something out of the common, 
won't it ? Stanley 'd give his ears to go, wouldn't you, 
Stanley? Oh, he 's not there. Where is that lad?' 

Yes, it was a little jaunt for her. It was great fun. 
First, Moorgate Street, the Bank, then King William Street 
went rattling past the taxi window; then came London 
Bridge, with leaden gleams of the river far below on either 
side; then a slow progress along a narrow street on the 
other side, a turn to the left up a street still narrower, a 
mere passage, at the end of which the taxi had to stop alto- 
gether. She dodged up another dark lane, asked a pleasant 
large policeman if she was going the right way, and finally 
found herself at the water's edge, where men were busy 
loading and running about with papers and shouting to 
one another. There, about fifty yards further down, was 
the Lemmata , a steamship with one tall thin funnel, not very 
large and rather dingy but nevertheless a fine romantic 
sight. A flag she had never seen before drooped from its 
little mast. As she drew nearer, she heard some of the 
men shouting down from the deck, and they were speaking 
in a language she had never heard before, a tremendously 
foreign language. Up to that moment, business had been 
for her an affair of clerks and desks and telephones and 
stupid letters that always began and ended in the same dull 
way, but now, in a flash, she suddenly realized that it 
was all very romantic. It was as if Mr. Dersingham had 
stalked into the office in Elizabethan costume. The wood 
they sold in Angel Pavement came in boats like this, in- 
deed in this very ship, and at the other end, where the 
veneers began, there was quite a different sort of life going 
on, huge forests, thick snow and frosts all winter, wolves 
on the prowl, bearded men wearing high boots, women in 
strange bright shawls, scenes out of the Russian Ballet. 
Miss Matfield, like most members of the English middle 
classes, was incurably romantic at heart, and now she 
was genuinely thrilled, and could hardly have been more 
astonished and delighted if a few nightingales has sud- 
denly burst into song in one of the dark archways. London 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 197 

was really marvellous, and the wonder of it rushed up in 
her mind and burst there like a rocket, scattering a multi- 
coloured host of vague but rich associations, a glittering 
jumble of history and nonsense and poetry, Dick Whitting- 
ton and galleons, Muscovy and Cathay, East Indiamen, 
the doldrums far away, and the Pool of London, lapping 
here only a stone's throw from the shops and offices and 
buses. 

She had arrived now at the foot of a gangway that came 
down steeply from the rusty side of the Lemmata. She 
looked up, hesitating. Somebody was calling. It was Mr. 
Golspie above, and he was waving her up. When she 
reached the head of the gangway he was there, waiting 
for her. 

'We 've a couple of hours at least before she moves,' he 
explained, piloting her along the deck, then up a short 
flight of stairs to the deck above, ‘but I shan't keep you so 
long, y' know. Awkward if she moved off and you were 
still aboard, eh ? Have to take a trip then, eh ? ' 

'I don't know that I 'd mind very much,' she told him, 
looking about her on the upper deck. ' It would be rather 
amusing.' 

' Oh, you wouldn’t have a bad time at all, s 0 long as you 
weren't seasick. These fellows here would make a great 
fuss of you, I can tell you.' 

'Well, that would be rather a nice change.' 

'Would it now? ' He grinned. 'Well, we won't kidnap 
you this time. We '11 go in here.' And he led the way into 
a little saloon, quite neat and cheerful. On the table, 
which was covered with a hideously bright cloth, were some 
cigars, a mysterious tall bottle of a shape she had never 
seen before, and several small glasses. Some newspapers 
and illustrated papers, printed in fantastic characters, were 
scattered about, and these helped more than anything else, 
unless it was the tall bottle, to make it all seem very foreign. 
Yet through the windows at each side she could see the 
roofs and spires, the familiar smoky mass, of London. 

'Ah, I 'd better look after that sample book,' said Mn 
Golspie, 'Now then, you sit down there, Miss Matfield, 
with your note-book.' 

She sat down and tried to pull the chair nearer to the 
table, but of course it would not move, or at least would 



198 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

only swing round. She was forgetting that she was on 
board a ship. It was all very odd and delightful. 

The letters were not difficult and were all more or less 
alike, and in half an hour they had done. Once or twice 
while they were at work, various faces, foreign faces, had 
peeped in at them, had nodded, smiled, and then dis- 
appeared. The only other interruptions were occasional 
shouts and hootings outside. 

'I think that 's all,' said Mr. Golspie, lighting a cigar and 
pouring himself out a drink from the tall bottle. 'But 
just you read what you 've done while I try to think if 
there 's anything else. There 's plenty of time. D' you 
smoke? That's right. Well, have a cigarette. Here, 
have one of these.' And he threw over a very fancy card- 
board box, from which she took a long cigarette that was 
half stiff paper, like a Russian. It was a fine romantic 
cigarette and she enjoyed it. 

‘Can't think of anything else,' said Mr. Golspie, puffing 
out a cloud of smoke. ‘Just run through that lot quickly, 
will you? ' She did, and there was only one change to be 
made. 'I '11 sign some sheets now for you,' he continued, 
4 and then you can take 'em back with you to the office. 1 
brought plenty of the firm’s stationery with me. Always 
do, wherever I am. That 's the worst of being on your own. 
Have to buy your own stationery. It 's a thing I hate 
doing. Funny, isn't it? I 'd spend money like water on 
ail sorts of silly rubbish and never turn a hair, but I hate 
spending money on paper. Expect you 're the same, 
aren't you, about something? ' 

'Pencils,' replied Miss Matfield promptly. 'I loathe and 
detest having to buy pencils. If I can't borrow or steal 
one, and actually have to go to a shop and pay money for 
one of the wretched things, I simply hate it.' 

‘Ah, we 're all a queer lot, even the best-looking of us,' 
Mr. Golspie ruminated while he signed the blank sheets. 
‘ We 're both crooks and old washerwomen rolled into one, 
though I expect you '11 tell me that you aren't, eh? ' 

* ‘No, I shan’t. I know exactly what you mean.' 

If they were on the very edge of a pleasant sympathetic 
talk, as it appeared at that moment, then Mr. Golspie only 
yanked them miles away at one swoop with his next 
remark. ‘Well, if you do,' he said, ‘you know more than 



MISS MATFIELD WONDERS 199 

I do. And that 's a nuisance/ He looked up, having 
finished with the sheets. ' Here, you 're shivering/ 

‘Am I? I didn't know I was. But I am rather cold 
now,' she admitted. She was still wearing her thick coat, 
but the little saloon was not warmed and there was a 
nipping air along the river. 

‘You 've finished here now/ said Mr. Golspie, looking at 
her, ' but if you '11 take my tip you won't go like that, you '11 
have a drink of something to warm you up first. Might get 
a cold before you could say “knife/" 

This was Mr. Golspie in a new and unsuspected vein. 
She could have laughed in his face. 

‘If the steward's about,' he continued, ‘I could get 
some tea for you. These people aren’t great on tea but 
they can make it all right. Or coffee, if you 'd rather have 
that. It just depends if he 's handy.' He got up, passing 
the signed sheets to her. 

‘ Oh, don't bother, Mr. Golspie. They 're probably all 
frightfully busy now, and I 'd rather not, thanks. I can 
get some tea on my way back to the office.' 

'Well, you must have something. You can't leave the 
ship shivering like that. Have some of this stuff,' and he 
pointed to the tall bottle. ‘ It '11 warm you up. I 'm 
going to have some. You join me.' He poured out two 
small glasses of the colourless liquid. 

‘Shall I? What is it?’ 

‘Vodka. It *s the favourite tipple in these ships.' 

Vodka! She picked up the glass and put her nose to it. 
She had never tasted vodka before, never remembered 
ever having seen it before, but of course it was richly 
associated with her memories of romantic fiction of various 
kinds, and was tremendously thrilling, the final completing 
thrill of the afternoon's adventure. At once she could 
hear herself bringing the vodka into her account of the 
adventure at the Club. ‘ And then, my dear,' it would run, 
‘I was given some vodka. There I was, in the cabin, 
swilling vodka like mad. Marvellous! ' 

'Come along, Miss Matfield,' said Mr. Golspie, looking a ft 
her over his raised glass. ‘Down it goes. Happy days!' 
And he emptied his glass with one turn of the wrist. 

‘All right/ she cried, raising hers. ‘What do I say? 
Cheerio? ' Boldly she drained her glass, too, in one gulp* 



200 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

For a second or so, nothing happened but a curious ani- 
seedy taste as the liquor slipped over her palate, but then, 
suddenly, it was as if an incendiary bomb had burst in her 
throat and sent white fire racing down every channel of 
her body. She gasped, laughed, coughed, all at once. 

'That 's the way, Miss Matfield. You put it down in 
great style. Try another. I 'm going to have one. Just 
another for good luck.' He filled the glasses again. 

She floated easily now on a warm tide. It was very 
pleasant. She took the glass, hesitated, then looked up at 
him. 'I *m not going to be tight, am I? If you make 
me drunk I shan't be able to type your letters, you know/ 
'Don't you worry about that/ he told her, grinning 
amiably and then patting her shoulder. 'You couldn't 
be soused on two glasses of this stuff, and you '11 be as 
sober as a judge by the time you get back to Angel Pave- 
ment. It '11 just make you feel warm and comfortable, 
and keep the cold out. Now then. Here she goes/ 

'Happy days!' cried Miss Matfield, smiling at him, and 
once more there came the aniseedy taste, the incendiary 
bomb, the racing white fire, and the final warm tide. 

‘Now I like you, Miss Matfield/ he told her, with a full 
stare of approval. ‘That was done in real style, like a 
good sport. You 've got some character, not like most of 
these pink little ninnies of girls you see here. I noticed 
that right at the start. I said to myself, “That girl's not 
only got looks but she 's got character too/ I wish you 
were coming with us/ 

'Thank you/ 

‘Well, it 's a real compliment. Though I don't know 
that you *d like it. It '11 be perishingly cold, and by to- 
morrow she '11 be rolling like the devil all the way across 
the North Sea, and she '11 start rolling again when we get 
into the Baltic. I know her of old. How d' you feel now ? * 
‘ Marvellous! 1 And she did. She rose and gathered her 
things together. ‘Not too sober, though/ 

When they went out on to the upper deck, she stopped 
and looked down the river. Daylight had dwindled to a 
faint silver above and an occasional cold gleam on the 
water, and at any other time she would probably have 
been depressed or half frightened by the leaden swell of 
the river itself, the uncertain lights beyond, and the 



MISS HATFIELD WONDERS 201 

melancholy hooting, but now it all seemed wonderfully 
mysterious and romantic. For a minute or so, she lost 
herself in it. She was quite happy and yet she felt close 
to tears. It was probably the vodka. 

‘Sort of hypnotizes you, doesn't it?* said Mr. Golspie 
gruffly, at her elbow. 

‘It does, doesn't it?' she said softly. At that moment, 
she decided that she liked Mr. Golspie and that he was an 
unusual and fascinating man. She also felt that she her- 
self was fascinating, really rather wonderful. Then she 
gave a quick shiver. 

‘Hello, you're not starting again?' he said, humorous 
but concerned too, and he took hold of her arm and drew 
her closer to his side. They stayed like that for a few 
moments. She did not mind being there. All that she 
felt was a sudden sense of warmth and safety. 

She stepped aside, and announced that she must go. 
He made no effort to detain her, said nothing; but simply 
led the way back to the lower deck and the gangway. 
There he stopped and held out his hand. 

‘Very pleased to have met you, Miss Matfietd,' he said, 
taking her hand and, for once, smiling rather than grinning. 

‘ I hope you have a good trip, Mr. Golspie,* she told him 
hurriedly, ‘and it isn't too cold and the crossing isn't too 
bad.' Then, without knowing why, she added: ‘And 
don't forget to come back.' 

He gave a sudden deep laugh. ‘Not I. You'll be 
seeing me again soon. I '11 be back in Angel Pavement 
before you can turn round.' And he gave her hand a 
huge squeeze, and released it. 

She turned round once and waved, though it was almost 
impossible to see if he was still there, then hurried down 
the narrow lane, which brought her gradually back into 
the ordinary world. By the time she crossed London 
Bridge again and looked through the bus window, there 
was hardly anything to be seen of that other world, only 
a glimmer of lights. By the time she was back at her 
table, holding her note-book up to the nearest shaded 
electric light, that other world was infinitely remote and 
might never have existed outside a daydream in the 
November dusk. Yet there, on the very paper she slipped 
behind the typewriter roller, was the sign that it was there. 



202 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

the sprawling J. Golspie of the signature. And it was 
queer now to think that he would be coming back, re- 
turning from his tall bottle and rolling ship and the snow 
and forests of the Baltic place, to walk through that swing 
door there, not a yard from Smeeth's elbow. It was queer 
and it was also rather exciting, which was more than could 
be said of the 13 bus and the lounge at the Burpenfield 
and her room there and the aspirin and the hot water. 
She sent the typewriter carrier flying along. It gave a 
sharp ping. 



CHAPTER VI 


MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 
I 

Mr. Smeeth was happier than he had been for some time. 
The shadow of dismissal, unemployment, degradation, 
ruin, had gone, except in occasional dreams, when, after 
a bit of fried liver or toasted cheese had refused to be di- 
gested, he had found himself out of a job for, ever and 
walking down vague dark streets with nothing on but 
his vest and pants. It had vanished from his waking 
hours. The firm had not only staved off bankruptcy, 
but it was doing a brisk trade — you might almost call it a 
roaring trade — in these new Baltic veneers and inlays. 
This meant that Mr. Smeeth had more and more columns 
of neat little figures to enter and add up, and that no 
matter how hard he worked during the day he had to put 
in an extra half-hour or so with the ledger and day-books 
in the evening. He did not mind that, though sometimes 
when it was nearer seven than six and the electric light 
above his head had been burning half the day and any 
real air there might have been in Angel Pavement during 
the morning had been used over and over again, well, 
he did find himself with a bit of a headache. Once or 
twice too he had that nasty little tickling sensation some- 
where in his inside, brt it never went on long, so he never 
said anything about it to anybody. If he had mentioned 
it to his wife, she would have dosed him with half a dozen 
different patent medicines and would have rushed out 
for half a dozen more. She did not care for doctors, but 
she loved patent medicines and would try one after an- 
other, not as an attempt to cure some definite ailment, 
for she could not claim to have one, but simply in the hope 
that there would be some mysterious magic in the bottle. 
Mrs. Smeeth called at the chemist’s in the same spirit in 

203 



204 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

which she called on her fortune-telling friends. Mr. 
Smeeth was sceptical about both, though not so scep- 
tical as he imagined himself to be. 

Occasional little pains, however, were nothing com- 
pared with the relief of seeing the firm busy again. There 
had been times when he had almost hated going to the 
bank, for he felt that even the cashiers were telling one 
another that Twigg and Dersingham were looking pretty 
rocky, but now it was a pleasure again. ‘Just going 
round to the bank, Turgis/ he would say, trying not to 
sound too important. (Not that it mattered with Turgis, 
who really thought Mr. Smeeth was important. But 
once or twice, when he had said something like this, he 
had caught a certain look, a kind of gleam, in Miss Mat- 
field’s eye. With that young madam you never knew.) 
Then he would button up his old brown overcoat, which 
had lasted very well but would have to be replaced as soon 
as he got a rise, put on his hat, fill his pipe as he went down 
the steps, stop and light it outside the Kwik-work Razor 
Blade place, and then march cosily with it down the 
chilled and smoky length of Angel Pavement. Every- 
where there would be a bustle and a jostling, with the 
roadway a bedlam of hooting and clanging and grinding 
gears, but he had his place in it all, his work to do, his 
position to occupy, and so he did not mind but turned on 
it a friendly eye and indulgent ear. The bank, secure in 
its marble and mahogany, would shut out the raw day 
and the raw sounds, and he would quietly, comfortably 
wait his turn, sending an occasional jet of fragrant T. 
Benenden towards the ornamental grill. ‘Morning, Mr. 
Smeeth/ they would say. 'A bit nippy this morning. 
How are things with you?' And then, if there was time 
for it, one of them might have a little story to tell, about 
one of those queer things that happen in the City. Then 
back again in the office, at his desk, and very cosy it was 
after the streets. The very sight of the blue ink, the red 
ink, the pencils and pens, the rubber, the paper fasteners, 
the pad and rubber stamps, all the paraphernalia of his 
desk, all there in their places, at his service, gave him a 
feeling of deep satisfaction. He felt dimly too that this 
was a satisfaction that none, of the others there, Turgis, 
the girls, young Stanley, would ever know, simply because 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 205 

they never came to work in the right spirit. His own two 
children were just the same. They were all alike now. 
Earn a bit, grab it, rush out and spend it, that was their 
lives. 

‘And it beats me, Mr. Dersingham,* he said to that 
gentleman, one morning, ‘who is going to be responsible 
in this lot, when the time comes. And the time must 
come, mustn't it? I mean, they can't be young and 
careless all their lives.' 

'Don't you worry, Smeeth. They'll all settle down,' 
replied Mr. Dersingham, who felt that he stood between 
these two different generations, and also felt that anyhow 
he knew a lot more about everything than Smeeth. ‘I 
can remember the time, and not so long ago, when I felt 
just the same,' he continued, evidently under the im- 
pression that he was now a tremendously responsible 
person. ‘When the time comes, we take the! responsi- 
bility all right. That 's the English way, ypu know, 
Smeeth.' 

‘I hope that is so, Mr. Dersingham,' said Mr. Smeeth 
doubtfully, ‘but this new lot does seem different, I must 
say. I know from my own two. Anything for tuppence, 
that 's their style, and let next week look aftet itself. It 
frightens me to hear them talk, though I say their mother's 
always been a bit like that and they may have got it 
from her.' 

Both George and Edna, however, unsatisfactory as their 
general outlook might be, seemed to be going on all right 
just then, and this too was a great source of pleasure to 
Mr. Smeeth, who saw them — and he had seen them ever 
since they were babies — surrounded by snares and pit- 
falls without number. He had to worry for two, for their 
mother never seemed to worry about them or anything 
else, for all her fortune-tellings and bottles from the chem- 
ist's, and to listen to her, you might think life was a fairy 
tale. To Mr. Smeeth — though he did not say so— life was 
a journey, unarmed and without guide or compass, through 
a jungle where poisonous snakes were lurking and man- 
eating tigers might spring out of every thicket. Only 
when he saw a little clear space in front of him could 
he be easy in mind. His was a naturally apprehensive 
nature, and in a religious age he would never have over- 



20t) 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


looked the least comforting observance. But he did not 
live in a religious age, and he had no faith of his own. In 
his universe, the gods had been banished but not the 
devils. He saw clearly enough all the signs and marks 
of evil in the world, having a mind that could foreshadow 
every stroke of malice out of the dark, and so was sur- 
rounded by demons that he was powerless either to placate 
or to vanquish. If, desiring as he did to be honest, decent, 
kind, good, and happy, his courage failed, he could call upon 
nobody, nothing — but the police. Thus he lived, this man 
who went so cosily from his little house to his little office, 
more apprehensively, more dangerously, than one of 
Edward the Third's bowmen. He touched wood, and 
desperately hoped for the bes+. Just now, it seemed to 
be arriving. He was happier than he had been for some 
time. 


II 

The morning after Mr. Golspie's departure, two things 
happened to Mr. Smeeth. The first seemed of little im- 
portance at the time, though afterwards he remembered 
it only too well. George rang up from his garage, with a 
message from his mother. * She's here now, only she 
doesn't fancy herself at the phone,' said George. 'So 
I 've got to give you the message. This is it. Do you 
remember her talk about her cousin, Fred Mitty? Well, 
he 's here in London with his wife. She 's just had a letter 
from them, and they want her to go round and see them 
to-night, somewhere Islington way. She didn't think 
you 'd want to go.' 

'No, I don't want to go,' Mr. Smeeth told him. ‘But 
that 's all right.' 

'Yes, I know it is,' said George, but the point is this. 
She 's going there to tea, and she '11 be gone some time 
before you get home. What she wants to know is this, 
has she to leave something for you, she says, or will you 
have your tea out somewhere and amuse yourself for 
once ' 

'Now then, George,' his father cried down the telephone 
sharply, 'that 's enough of that.' 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 207 

1 1 ’m only telling you what she says/ George’s voice 
explained. ‘Keep cool, dad. Nothing to do with me. 
You can either have your tea out and amuse yourself ' 

'I don’t want to amuse myself. As I 've told some 
of you before/ he added, rather grimly, *1 like a quiet 
life.* 

‘All right then, she can leave something for you. You 'll 
only have to warm it up yourself. I shan't be in and Edna 
won't be either.' 

'Here, all right,' said Mr. Smeeth, who was not fond of 
warming things up for himself. ‘I '11 stop out for once. 
Tell your mother that 's all right. And tell her I hope she 
enjoys herself with Mr. Mi tty.' 

He had heard his wife talk about her cousin, Fred Mitty 
— she was rather given to talking about her relations — but 
he had never met him. Mitty had been living in one of the 
big provincial towns, Birmingham or Manchester, for the 
last few years. He could have stopped there, for all Mr. 
Smeeth cared. However, his wife would enjoy herself. 
She liked nothing better than going out for the evening and 
having a good old gas with somebody fairly lively, and Mr 
Smeeth remembered now that Fred Mitty — what a name! 
— was supposed to be very lively, one of the dashing 
members of his wife's family, the chief comedian at all the 
weddings, and all the funerals too for that matter. So long 
as Mrs. Smeeth's lot could all get together and eat and 
drink and gas and kiss one another, they didn't much care 
whether they were marrying them or burying them. The 
Smeeths, what was left of them, were different. When 
they met, it meant business. Four of them had not 
spoken to one another for ten years, all because of two 
cottage houses in Highbury. His wife's lot would have 
sold the pair and eaten and drunk away the proceeds in 
less than a week. 

‘But it wouldn't do for us all to be alike, would it, young 
lady?' he cried, almost gaily, to Miss Poppy Sellers, who 
came up to him at that moment with some invoices she had 
just typed. 

‘That 's what my dad 's always saying, Mr. Smeeth,' she 
replied in her own queer fashion, half perky, half shy. 
‘And my mother always says, “Well, you might try a bit 
any way."' 



208 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

' And what does she mean by that ? ' asked Mr. Smeeth, 
amused. 

Miss Sellers shook her dark little head. ' I might be able 
to give a guess, and then again I mightn't. I Ve done all 
these, Mr. Smeeth. Are they all right? ' 

'Well, now, let 's have a look/ he said, adjusting his 
eyeglasses. 'I might be able to tell you — and then again 
I mightn't/ 

She laughed. She was a nice little thing, even though 
Turgis had kept on grumbling about her. But he had 
not grumbled so much lately. He had not done anything 
much lately, except get on with his work — he had done 
that all right — and then sit mooning. The only time he 
looked lively and brisk and up-to-the-minute was when Mr. 
Golspie came in and asked him to do something. A queer 
lad, Turgis. But he was beginning to smarten himself up a 
bit, that was something ; he had taken to brushing his hair 
and his clothes and changing his collars a little more often; 
and about time too. Mr. Smeeth shot a glance at him over 
his glasses, then read through the invoices. 

'Please, Mr. Smeeth/ said Stanley, returning from the 
private office, 'Mr. Dersingham wants to see you.' 

And this was the second thing that happened that morn- 
ing, this little interview with Mr. Dersingham. 

'What I feel, Smeeth/ said Mr. Dersingham, after a few 
preliminaries, ‘is that you 've been doing your bit for the 
firm, and the firm now ought to do its bit for you. You Ve 
had a good deal of extra work lately, haven't you, just as 
we all have? ' 

‘ I have, Mr. Dersingham. It 's been a very busy time 
for me — and I 'm glad to say so, sir.' 

' For me too, I can tell you. I Ve been putting my back 
into it these last few weeks. Jolly heavy going, if you ask 
me. Particularly this last week, with the big drive — and 
it 's not over yet, not by a long chalk it isn't. However, 
what I wanted to say is this, you Ve stood by the firm, 
done your best and all that, and now I propose to give you 
a rise.' He paused, and looked at his employee. 

‘Thank you very much, sir,' cried Mr. Smeeth, flushing. 

' I didn't want to say anything just yet, knowing how things 
have been, but Mr. Golspie did say something, just after 
became ' 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 209 

'Well, of course, this isn't Golspie's show at all. I mean 
to say, he has his work here and, to a certain extent, he 's 
in charge, but whether you get a rise or not or anybody else 
gets a rise or not has nothing to do with him. It 's my 
affair entirely.' 

‘Quite so, Mr. Dersingham. I quite understand that,' 
said Mr. Smeeth apologetically, though he was already 
silently thanking Mr. Golspie for this. 

‘Though it 's — er — only fair to tell you that Mr. Golspie 
did mention it to me. But, as a matter of fact, I 'd 
practically made up my mind then. He mentioned you, 
and he also mentioned Miss Matfield. He seemed to think 
she had been doing some very good work.* 

‘ Miss Matfield 's been working very well, sir. And she 
certainly isn't getting as much as she might. We promised 
her a rise, if possible, after the first six months, when she 
was taken on.' 

‘Well, I thought from now on, we 'd give her ! three ten 
instead of three pounds. Perhaps you 'll tell her, Smeeth. 
Do it quietly. I don't think I can give Turgis. any more 
yet.' 

‘He 's improving, Mr. Dersingham.' 

‘He'll have to wait, though. As for you, Smeeth, I 
thought we 'd make it three seventy-five for yarn' 

This was a fine rise, well over a pound a week. ‘Thank 
you very much, Mr. Dersingham. I 'm sure I '11 do my 
best ' 

But Mr. Dersingham, large, pink, benevolent, cut him 
short with a friendly wave of the hand. ‘That 's all right, 
Smeeth. I hope it won't be the last, either. You '11 rise 
with the firm, and at the present rate there 's no telling 
where we shall land. Mr. Golspie has suggested several 
side-lines, quite profitable, handled properly, and I pro- 
pose to look into our end of it while he 's away. Oh — by 
the way — I think those increases, both yours and Miss 
Matfield's, had better begin this fortnight, eh? ' 

At odd intervals throughout the day, Mr. Smeeth 
thought about this extra money and delightedly con- 
sidered what might be done with it. He was, of course, 
all in favour of saving it. They lived comfortably as they 
were but they saved little or nothing, and now at last they 
had a chance of really putting something away. Insurance? 



210 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

That ought to be looked into, for they had all kinds of 
schemes. National Savings? A good safe investment. 
They might buy a house through one of the Building 
Societies. He saw himself looking into all these things, 
smoking his pipe over them and then making notes and 
putting down a few rows of neat little figures. It almost 
made his mouth water. 

It was not until late afternoon, when they were finish- 
ing off, that he began to tackle the major problem, for, like 
most people, he preferred to examine the little problems, 
the pleasant cheerful little fellows, first. Plump in 
the middle of this major problem was Mrs. Smeeth. If 
she was told about this extra money, she would want to 
spend it. That was her nature; she was a born spender. 
She was not a grabber and she was not a grumbler; if the 
money was not there, she made no complaint, and could 
make a little go a long way with the best of them, if 
there was no help for it. Tell her there was more money 
coming into the house, and she would never rest until it 
had been all frittered away, on clothes and ornaments and 
meals in cafes and visits to the theatre and the pictures 
and trips to the seaside and chocolate and bottles of 
port wine. Insurance and National Savings and Building 
Societies! — he could hear her telling him what she thought 
about them , and what she thought about him too for sug- 
gesting such a miserable way of spending their money. 
(She never understood the idea of saving, except when it 
merely meant putting a few shillings in a vase until 
Saturday. Giving money to an insurance company or a 
bank seemed to her simply spending it and getting nothing 
in return.) She would make him appear a mean ageing 
sort of chap, almost an old miser, cutting a contemptible 
figure in her eyes, and would refer to other men of her 
acquaintance, big, open-handed, dashing fellows. That 
would be so hateful that, finally, he would give in, and then 
what would they have for the future, for the rainy day? 
Empty bottles and chocolate boxes and old programmes 
and souvenirs of Clacton. It wasn't good enough. He 
saw one way out, of course, and that was not to tell her at 
all, to say nothing about his rise until he had made a good 
start with his savings; but he hated the thought of doing 
that. It meant lying to her, not once but perhaps scores 



211 


MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 

of times. It would be all for the best, but he had an idea 
that she would feel mean all the time. Some chaps seemed 
to think of their wives as people you always felt mean with, 
and to hear them talk you would think they had married 
their worst enemies, but though he and Edie were often 
pulling different ways, that wasn't their style at all. So 
what was he to do ? 

His mind was still busy with this problem when he left 
the office for the night and called in T. Benenden's, round 
the corner. As he watched Benenden take down the 
familiar canister, he wondered if Benenden was married. 
He had exchanged remarks with him all these years and 
never found that out. Surely Benenden couldn't be 
married. A man who never wore a tie couldn't possibly 
have a wife, unless of course he left home with a tie and 
then took it off in the shop. 

'You a married man, Mr. Benenden?' he inquired 
casually. 

T. Benenden stopped his weighing at once. 'Now that 's 
a queer question,' he said, staring. 

'I beg your pardon, I 'm sure,' said Mr. Smeeth, rather 
embarrassed. 'No business of mine at all/ 

'Not at all, not at all,’ said T. Benenden, still staring. 
' No offence taken, I assure you. What I really meant was, 
it 's a queer question for me to answer. You say to me, 
“Are you a married man, Mr. Benenden ? " Well, the only 
answer I can give to that is — I am — and then again I 'm 
not. What do you make of that ? ' 

Before Mr. Smeeth had time to make anything of it, a 
youth rushed in, flung some coppers on the counter, and 
cried, 'Packet o' gaspers. Ten.' 

Mr. Benenden contemptuously threw down a packet of 
cigarettes, contemptuously swept the coppers away, and 
watched the youth rush out again with even greater 
contempt. 

'You saw that, you 'eard it?' he said scornfully. 
'"Packet o' gaspers. Packet o' gaspers” Rushes in, 
rushes out, never stops to say please or thank you , never 
stops to think. Just — packet o' gaspers. Can't even 
say of. A packet of gaspers. Now that/ he continued 
gravely, his eyes fixed on Mr. Smeeth's apparently without 
once winking, /is the ruin of the tobacco trade to-day. I 

H93* 



212 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

don't mean there 's no money in it. There is money in it. 
That 's where the big forchewns ’ave been made — packets 
o' gaspers. If you and me had had the sense to realize, 
when the War started, that this packet o' gasper business 
was bound to come, bound to come — men smoking 'em, 
women smoking 'em, boys and girls smoking 'em — we could 
have made our forchewns, as easy as that. You watch 
for the big dividends in our trade — where are they? It 
isn't tobacco that 's behind ’em — it ’s packets o' gaspers. 
Same with the shops. Quick turnover, in and out, throw 
'em down, pick 'em up, outchew go. Easy money. All 
right. But I say it 's the ruin of the tobacconist to-day. 
And why? It takes the 'eart out of the business. Some 
of 'em have started putting rows of automatic machines 
outside at closing time. You 've seen 'em. Well, I say 
they might as well keep 'em all day and have done with it. 
Packet o' gaspers. Ten. There *s your sixpence. Twenty. 
There 's your shilling. Am I a man or am I an automatic 
machine? ' 

'Quite so,' said Mr. Smeeth, nodding his head. 

'I 'm a man, and what 's more, I 'm a man with expert 
knowledge, I am. You come to me, and you say, "I want 
such and such a smoke, a bit of Virginia, a bit of Lati-kee- 
ya — or you mightn't say that because you mightn't know 
so much about it — but anyhow you 've got your idea of 
what you want and you come to me and I fix you up, just 
as I 've fixed you up with this mixture of mine. There 's 
some pleasure in that. But this packet o' gasper business. 
I might as well stand in the door there, and every time you 
put sixpence in my mouth, a packet of ten drops out of 
my waistcoat.' 

* You 'd look well, wouldn’t you ? ' Mr. Smeeth watched 
him filling the pouch, and could not help thinking that T. 
Benenden's Own looked dustier than usual. 

‘Getting a bit down with that,' T. Benenden admitted, 
rolling up the pouch, ‘though if you ask me, I 'd tell you to 
give me the bottom of the tin every time. That 's not 
ordinary dust, y' know. That 's good short stuff, best 
Oriental. It ’s rich, that, and the Prince of Wales wouldn't 
want anything better than that in his pipe — and I believe 
he smokes one.' 

‘I believe he does,' said Mr. Smeeth, handing over his 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 213 

money. ‘ But what was that you were saying about being 
married ?' 

‘Ar, yes/ said T. Benenden, preparing to consume some 
of his own stock. ‘Well, my answer to that question of 
yours was “I am and I 'm not ." And how do you puzzle 
that out ? ' he asked, with the air of a man who had pro- 
duced a rare riddle. ‘Bit of a facer, that, eh? ' 

‘Oh, I don't know. I 'd say — offhand — that you say 
you are married because you 're still legally married and 
have a wife living, but at the same time you say you 're 
not married because you 're not living the life of a married 
man. In fact, you 're separated from your wife. How 's 
that, Mr. Benenden ? ' 

The other's face fell at being robbed so quickly of the 
chance of explaining himself. ‘That was a bit of smart 
thinking on your part, Mr. Smeeth,' he said, brightening 
up. ‘There aren't many men about here who could have 
got on to it like that. And you 're right. I 've been 
separated for nearly ten years. She goes her way, and I 
go mine. We were only married three years, and that 
was quite enough for me, a regular cat-and-dog life that 
was. If she wanted to go out, I wanted to stay in, and if 
she wanted to stay in, I wanted to go out. Well, that 's 
all right, isn't it ? If she wants to go out, let her go out. 
If she wants to stay in, let her stay in. What 's the 
matter with that? Ar, but that 's a man's point of view. 
This is where the unfairness of the sex comes in. I was 
ready to let her go out or stay in, just as she pleased. But 
what about her? Had she the same fair-minded attitude, 
the same broad principles ? ' Mr. Benenden here removed 
his pipe to make room for a short bitter laugh. ‘When 
she wanted to go out, I 'd to go out too, and when she 
wanted to stay in, I 'd to stay in as well. That was her 
idear. Dog in the manger, she was, all the time, and 
specially on Saturdays and Sundays, just when you 
wanted a bit of give and take. We didn't get on. Why 
some men like to tell you they get on so well with women 's 
a mystery to me. I never did get on with 'em, and I don't 
care who knows it.' 

'That 's the spirit,' said Mr. Smeeth, for no particular 
reason except that he felt Benenden ought to be en- 
couraged. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


214 

'Yes, well, as I say, we 'd three years of it, and she left 
me three times and I left her twice during them three 
years. Interfering relations always " brought us together" 
— as they called it — but it was a miserable business. One 
of us was always packing up. I never knew whether I 
was going home to find a bit of supper or a note to say 
she 'd gone to her sister's at Saffron Walden. So the last 
time, I left a note saying she 'd better stay for good at 
Saffron Waldron and I went into lodgings down Camber- 
well way for a week and didn't go back for over a week. 
When I did go back, she 'd just gone again to Saffron 
Walden — she 'd been back, you see, and waited a few 
days — and she stayed there.' 

'And don't you ever see her now?' 

'Let me see,' said T. Benenden, tickling his beard with 
the stem of his pipe. 'Last time I ran across her by ac- 
cident, a year or two ago, or it might be three years ago. 
I was walking round the Confectionery and Grocery Ex- 
hibition at the Agricultural Hall, and I suddenly saw her 
and her sister — they 're in that line — and another woman 
all eating free samples of custard or jelly or potted meat 
or something, which is what I might have known they 
would be doing. I gave them one look and then went 
the other way.' 

‘Didn't you stop at all?' said Mr. Smeeth. 

'If I 'd gone up to them there,' said Mr. Benenden 
earnestly, 'what would have happened? A lot of argu- 
ment. "You did this — Oh, did I? — Well, you did that." 
What she wouldn’t have said, her sister 'ud said for her. 
Her sister had a tongue a yard long, noted for it up in 
Saffron Walden. I know that because a man from there 
came into this very shop one morning. Well, you can't 
have that sort of argument at a free custard and jelly 
stall, can you? I had a picture post card from her last 
year, from Cromer — all show-off, y' know. No, I'm 
better without them. Let 's see, Mr. Smeeth, I think 
you're married, aren't you? I seem to recollect you're 
a family man.' 

'That's right,' said Mr. Smeeth, feeling very much at 
that moment the affectionate father and husband. 'And 
I like it.' 

'Oh, it suits some people,' said Mr. Benenden judici- 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 215 

ally. 'They have a knack or an inclination that way. 
I ’m not laying down any rules about it. But it never 
suited me. I like a quiet life of my own, to do what I 
like when I like, and have time to think things over. 
Good night/ 

As Mr. Smeeth walked away, he came to the conclusion 
that he had solved the mystery of the absent tie. Ben- 
enden did not wear a tie just to show his independence. 
Mr. Smeeth, however, did not envy him, although the 
question of Mrs. Smeeth and the extra money had yet to 
be settled. He was glad that he was not going home for 
once and would not have to meet his wife until late that 
night. He dismissed the problem and asked himself in- 
stead how he should spend the evening. The first thing 
to do was to have a meal and as he had once or twice had 
a respectable sort of high tea in a place in Holbom, he de- 
cided to go there again, so turned down Alderman bury 
and Milk Street, caught a bus in Cheapside and, ten min- 
utes later, was seated snugly at a little table in the teashop. 

He could not help feeling richer than he had done that 
morning. Now he was practically a four- 4 tt»ndred-a-year 
man instead of a three - hundred - a - year man. He felt 
that he was entitled to celebrate this promotion in his own 
quiet way. So he began by ordering a good solid high tea, 
and then searched his paper to discover what was happen- 
ing that night in the world of entertainment. There was 
a symphony concert at the Queen’s Hall. He would go 
there. He had never been to the Queen’s Hall, had always 
thought of the concerts there as being a bit above his head. 
Symphony concerts at the Queen’s Hall — it did sound 
rather heavy, rather alarming too, but he would try it. 
After all, though he didn’t pretend to know much about it, 
he did like music, indeed liked nothing better than music, 
and there would be sure to be something he could enjoy, and 
the Queen’s Hall, expensive and highbrow as it sounded, 
couldn’t kill him. So far, he had got his music from 
gramophone records and the wireless, bands in the park or 
at the seaside, popular concerts in North London or oc- 
casionally at the Kingsway Hall and the Central Hall, 
and nights in the gallery in the old days to hear the Carl 
Rosa Company do Carmen and kigoletto and that one 
about the pierrots, Pag-lee-atchyjie supposed they called 



2X6 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


it. Well, this would be a new move, this Symphony 
Concert in the Queen's Hall, a bit of an adventure. He 
ate his tea deliberately, as usual, but with a little inner 
glow of excitement. 

He arrived at the Queen's Hall in what he imagined 
to be very good time, but was surprised to find, after 
paying what seemed to him a stiffish price, that there was 
only just room for him in the gallery. Another ten minutes 
and he would have been too late, a thought that gave him 
a good deal of pleasure as he climbed the steps, among all 
the eager, chattering symphony concert-goers. 


hi 

His seat was not very comfortable, high up too, but he 
liked the look of the place, with its bluey-green walls and 
gilded organ-pipes and lights shining through holes in the 
roof like fierce sunlight, its rows of little chairs and music 
stands, all ready for business. It was fine. He did not buy 
a programme — they were asking a shilling each for them, 
and a man must draw a line somewhere — but spent his time 
looking at the other people and listening to snatches of their 
talk. They were a queer mixture, quite different from any- 
body you were likely to see either in Stoke Newington or 
Angel Pavement; a good many foreigners (the kind with 
brown baggy stains under their eyes), Jewy people, a few 
wild-looking young fellows with dark khaki shirts and 
longish hair, a sprinkling of quiet middle-aged men like 
himself, and any number of pleasant young girls and refined 
ladies; and he studied them all with interest. On one side 
of him were several dark foreigners in a little party, a brown 
wrinkled oldish woman who never stopped talking Spanish 
or Italian or Greek or some such language, a thin young 
man who was carefully reading the programme, which 
seemed to be full of music itself, and, on the far side, two 
yellow girls. On the other side, his neighbour was a large 
man whose wiry grey hair stood straight up above a broad 
red face, obviously an Englishman but a chap rather out of 
the common, a bit cranky perhaps and fierce in his opinions. 

This man, moving restlessly in the cramped space, bumped 
against Mr* Smeeth and muttered an apology. 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 217 

‘Not much room, is there? ' said Mr. Smeeth amiably. 

‘Never is here, sir/ the man replied fiercely. 

* Is that so? * said Mr. Smeeth. ' I don’t often come here/ 
He felt it would not do to admit that this was the very 
first time. 

‘Always crowded at these concerts, full up, packed out, 
not an inch of spare room anywhere. And always the 
same. What the devil do they mean when they say they 
can’t make these concerts pay ? Whose fault is it ? ’ he 
demanded fiercely, just as if Mr. Smeeth were partly re- 
sponsible. ‘ We pay what they ask us to pay. We fill the 
place, don’t we? What do they want? Do they want 
people to hang down from the roof or sit on the organ 
pipes? They should build a bigger hall or stop talking 
nonsense.’ 

Mr. Smeeth agreed, feeling glad there was no necessity 
for him to do anything else. 

‘Say that to some people,’ continued the fieifce man, who 
needed no encouragement, ‘and they say, *Well, what 
about the Albert Hall? That’s big enough, isn’t it?” 
The Albert Hall! The place is ridiculous. I was silly 
enough to go and hear Kreisler there, a few weeks ago. 
Monstrous! They might as well have used a racecourse 
and sent him up to play in a captive balloon. If it had 
been a gramophone in the next house but one, it couldn’t 
have been worse. Here you do get the music, I will say 
that. But it *s damnably cramped up here/ 

The orchestral players were now swarming in like black 
beetles, and Mr. Smeeth amused himself trying to decide 
what all the various instruments were. Violins, cellos, 
double-basses, flutes, clarinets, bassoons, trumpets or 
cornets, trombones, he knew them, but he was not sure 
about some 6f the others — were those curly brass things 
the horns ? — and it was hard to see them at all from where 
he was. When they had all settled down, he solemnly 
counted them, and there were nearly a hundred. Some- 
thing like a band, that ! This was going to be good, he told 
himself. At that moment, everybody began clapping. 
The conductor, a tall foreign-looking chap with a shock of 
grey hair that stood out all round his head, had arrived at 
his little railed-in platform, and was giving the audience a 
series of short jerky bows. He gave two little taps. All 



218 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


the players brought their instruments up and looked at 
him. He slowly raised his arms, then brought them down 
sharply and the concert began. 

First, all the violins made a shivery sort of noise that 
you could feel travelling up and down your spine. Some 
of the clarinets and bassoons squeaked and gibbered a little, 
and the brass instruments made a few unpleasant remarks. 
Then all the violins went rushing up and up, and when they 
got to the top, the stout man at the back hit a gong, the 
two men near him attacked their drums, and the next 
moment every man jack of them, all the hundred, went at 
it for all they were worth, and the conductor was so ener- 
getic that it looked as if his cuffs were about to fly up to 
the organ. The noise was terrible, shattering : hundreds of 
tin buckets were being kicked down flights of stone steps; 
walls of houses were falling in ; ships were going down ; ten 
thousand people were screaming with toothache; steam 
hammers were breaking loose; whole warehouses of oil- 
cloth were being stormed and the oilcloth all tom into 
shreds; and there were railway accidents innumerable. 
Then suddenly the noise stopped ; one of the clarinets, all 
by itself, went slithering and gurgling; the violins began 
their shivery sound again and at last shivered into silence. 
The conductor dropped his arms to his side. Nearly 
everybody clapped. 

Neither Mr. Smeeth nor his neighbour joined in the 
applause. Indeed, the fierce man snorted a good deal, 
obviously to show his disapproval. 

*1 didn't care for that much, did you? ' said Mr. Smeeth, 
who felt he could risk it after those snorts. 

‘That? Muck. Absolute muck,' the fierce man bel- 
lowed into Mr. Smeeth's left ear. ' If they 'll swallow that 
they 'll swallow anything, any mortal thing. Downright 
sheer muck. Listen to 'em.' And as the applause con- 
tinued, the fierce man, in despair, buried his huge head in 
his hands and groaned. 

The next item seemed to Mr. Smeeth to be a member of 
the same unpleasant family as the first, only instead of 
being the rowdy one, it was the thin sneering one. He had 
never heard a piece of music before that gave such an im- 
pression of thinness, boniness, scragginess, and scratchiness. 
It was like having thin wires pushed into your ears. You 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 219 

felt as if you were trying to chew ice-cream. The violins 
hated the sight of you and of one another; the reedy instru- 
ments were reedier than they had ever been before but 
expressed nothing but a general loathing; the brass only 
came in to blow strange hollow sounds; and the stout man 
and his friends at the top hit things that had all gone flat, 
dead, as if their drums were burst. Very tall thin people 
sat about drinking quinine and sneering at one another, and 
in the middle of them, on the cold floor, was an idiot child 
that ran its finger-nail up and down a slate. One last 
scratch from the slate, and the horror was over. Once 
more, the conductor, after wiping his brow, was acknow- 
ledging the applause. 

This time, Mr. Smeeth did not hesitate. 'And I don't 
like that either/ he said to his neighbour. 

'You don't?' The fierce man was almost staggered. 
'You don't like it? You surprise me, sir, you do, indeed. 
If you don’t like that, what in the name of thunder are 
you going to like — in modern music. Come, come, you 've 
got to give the moderns a chance. You can't refuse them 
a hearing altogether, can you ? ' 

Mr. Smeeth admitted that you couldn't, but said it in 
such a way as to suggest that he was doing his best to keep 
them quiet. 

‘Very well, then/ the fierce man continued, 'you've 
got to confess that you 've just listened to one of the two 
or three things written during these last ten years or so 
that is going to live . Come now, you must admit that/ 

‘Well, I dare say,' said Mr. Smeeth, knitting his brows. 

Here the fierce man began tapping him on the arm. 
‘Form? Well, of course, the thing hasn't got it, and it 's 
no good pretending it has, and that 's where you and I ' 
— Mr. Smeeth was given a heavier tap, almost a bang, to 
emphasize this — ' find ourselves being cheated. But we 're 
asking for something that isn't there. But the tone values, 
the pure orchestral colouring — superb ! Damn it, it 's got 
poetry in it. Romantic, of course. Romantic as you like 
— ultra-romantic. All these fellows now are beginning to 
tell us they 're classical, but they 're all romantic really, 
the whole boiling of 'em, and Berlioz is their man only they 
don't know it, or won't admit it. What do you say ? ' 

Mr. Smeeth observed very cautiously that he had no 



220 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


doubt there was a lot to be said for that point of view. 
When the interval came and he went out to smoke a pipe, 
he took care to keep moving so that the fierce man, who 
appeared to be on the prowl, did not find him. 

The concert was much better after the interval. It began 
with a longish thing in which a piano played about one half, 
and most of the orchestra, for some of them never touched 
their instruments, played the other half. A little dark 
chap played the piano and there could be no doubt about 
it, he could play the piano. Terrum, ter -rum, terrum, ter- 
rum, trum, trum, trrrrr, the orchestra would go, and the 
little chap would lean back, looking idly at the conductor. 
But the second the orchestra stopped he would hurl himself 
at the piano, and crash out his own terrum, ter -rum, terrum, 
terrum, trum trum trrr. Sometimes the violins would play 
very softly and sadly, and the piano would join in, scattering 
silver showers of notes or perhaps wandering up and down 
a ladder of quiet chords, and then Mr. Smeeth would feel 
himself very quiet and happy and sad all at the same time. 
In the end, they had a pell-mell race, and the piano shouted 
to the orchestra and then went scampering away, and the 
orchestra thundered at the piano and. went charging after 
it, and they went up hill and down dale, shouting and 
thundering, scampering and charging, until one big bang, 
during which the little chap seemed to be almost sitting on 
the piano and the conductor appeared to be holding the 
whole orchestra up in his two arms, brought it to an end. 
This time Mr. Smeeth clapped furiously, and so did the 
fierce man, and so did everybody else, even the violin 
players in the orchestra; and the little chap, now purple 
in the face, ran in and out a dozen times, bowing all the 
way. But he would not play again, no matter how long 
and loud they clapped, and Mr. Smeeth, for his part, could 
not blame him. The little chap had done his share. My 
word, there was talent for you ! 

4 Our old friend now/ said the fierce man, turning abruptly. 

4 Where ? ' cried Mr. Smeeth, startled. 

‘On the programme/ the other replied. ‘It's the 
Brahms Number One next/ 

4 Is it really/ said Mr. Smeeth. 4 That ought to be good/ 
He had heard of Brahms, knew him as a chap who had 
written some Hungarian dances. But, unless he was 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 221 

mistaken, these dances were only a bit of fun for Brahms, 
who was one of your very classical men. The Number One 
part of it he did not understand, and did not like to ask 
about it, but as the elderly foreign woman on his right 
happened to be examining the programme, he had a peep 
at it and had just time to discover that it was a symphony, 
Brahms’s First Symphony in fact, they were about to hear. 
It would probably be clean above his head, but it could 
not possibly be so horrible to listen to as that modem stuff 
in the first half of the programme. 

It was some time before he made much out of it. The 
Brahms of this symphony seemed a very gloomy, ponderous, 
rumbling sort of chap, who might now and then show a 
flash of temper or go in a comer and feel sorry for himself, 
but for the most part simply went on gloomily rumbling 
and grumbling. There were moments, however, when 
there came a sudden gush of melody, something infinitely 
tender swelling out of the strings or a ripply of laughter 
from the flutes and clarinets or a fine flare up by the whole 
orchestra, and for these moments Mr. Smeeth waited, 
puzzled but excited, like a man catching glimpses of some 
delectable strange valley through the swirling mists of a 
mountain-side. As the symphony went on, he began to 
get the hang of it more and more, and these moments re- 
turned more frequently, until at last, in the final section, 
the great moment arrived and justified everything, the 
whole symphony concert. 

It began, this last part, with some muffled and doleful 
sounds from the brass instruments. He had heard some of 
those grim snatches of tune earlier on in the symphony, 
and now when they were repeated in this fashion they had 
a very queer effect on him, almost frightened him. It was 
as if all the workhouses and hospitals and cemeteries ol 
North London had been flashed past his eyes. Those 
brass instruments didn’t think Smeeth had much of a 
chance. All the violins were sorry about it ; they protested, 
they shook, they wept; but the horns and trumpets and 
trombones came back and blew them away. Then the 
whole orchestra became tumultuous, and one voice after 
another raised itself above the menacing din, cried in anger, 
cried in sorrow, and was lost again. There were queer 
little intervals, during one of which only the strings played, 



222 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

and they twanged and plucked instead of using their bows, 
and the twanging and plucking, quite soft and slow at 
first, got louder and faster until it seemed as if there was 
danger everywhere. Then, just when it seemed as if some- 
thing was going to burst, the twanging and plucking was 
over, and the great mournful sounds came reeling out 
again, like doomed giants. After that the whole thing 
seemed to be slithering into hopelessness, as if Brahms had 
got stuck in a bog and the light was going. But then the 
great moment arrived. Brahms jumped clean out of his 
bog, set his foot on the hard road, and swept the orchestra 
and the fierce man and the three foreigners and Mr. Smeeth 
and the whole Queen's Hall along with him, in a noble stride. 
This was a great tune. Ta turn ta ta turn turn, ta turn ta-ta 
turn ta turn. He could have shouted at the splendour of 
it. The strings in a rich deep unison sweeping on, and you 
were ten feet high and had a thousand glorious years to 
live. But in a minute or two it had gone, this glory of 
sound, and there was muddle and gloom, a sudden sweet- 
ness of violins, then harsh voices from the brass. Mr. 
Smeeth had given it up, when back it came again, swelling 
his heart until it nearly choked him, and then it was lost 
once more and everything began to be put in its place and 
settled, abruptly, fiercely, as if old Brahms had made up 
his mind to stand no nonsense from anybody or anything 
under the sun. There, there, there there, there . It was 
done. They were all clapping and clapping and the con- 
ductor was mopping his forehead and bowing and then 
signalling to the band to stand up, and old Brahms had 
slipped away, into the blue. 

There was a cold drizzle of rain outside in Langham 
Place, where the big cars of the rich were nosing one another 
like shiny monsters, and it was a long and dreary way to 
Chaucer Road, Stoke Newington, but odd bits of the magic 
kept floating back into his mind, and he felt more excited 
and happy than he had done when he had heard about the 
rise that morning. Undoubtedly a lot of this symphony 
concert stuff was either right above his head or just simply 
didn't mean anything to anybody. But what was good was 
good. Ta turn ta ta — now how did that go? All the way 
from the High Street to Chaucer Road, as he hurried down 
the darkening streets and tried to make his overcoat collar 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 223 

reach the back of his hat, he was also trying to capture 
that tune. He could feel it still beating and glowing 
somewhere inside him. 

His wife and Edna were in. He heard their voices 
as he shut the front door. George was probably still out. 
‘Hello, there. Only me/ he shouted. ‘George in yet?* 
They told him that George was in bed (George was always 
out very late or in bed quite early. A puzzling lad), so 
he carefully locked and bolted the front door. 

‘Well, here's the wanderer,’ cried Mrs. Smeeth gaily. 
She had still got her hat and coat on, and was refreshing 
herself with a piece of cake and half a tumbler of stout. 
‘And where did you get to, dad? ' 

‘Went to a concert,’ he replied, a trifle self-consciously. 
He drew nearer the fire and began taking off his boots. 

‘ Get your dad his slippers, Edna, that 's a good girl,* said 
her mother. ‘ And where was this concert, theft ? ' 

‘Queen’s Hall.’ 

‘Oo, classy, aren’t we?’ cried Mrs. Smeeth. ‘Did you 
like it?' 

‘I '11 bet he didn’t,’ said Edna, an aggressive low-brow. 

‘How do you know he didn’t, miss? Some people like 
a bit of good music, even if you don’t. We 're not all 
jazz-mad. There 's nobody round here who enjoys good 
music, classical pieces, better than your father. Isn’t that 
so, dad? Nobody knows that better than I do, the times 
I 've had to listen to it as well, and a little bit goes a long 
way with me. Now you get off to bed, Edna, now, else you 
won't be getting up in the morning and then you ’ll be in a 
bit more trouble at the shop.’ 

‘What’s this?' asked Mr. Smeeth, looking at his wife 
and then at bis daughter. ‘Has she been getting into 
any trouble ? ' 

‘It wasn't my fault at all, and you needn’t have men- 
tioned it, mother,' Edna began, but she was cut short by 
her mother. 

‘I didn't say it was, but it will be if you don’t pop off 
upstairs.' She waited then until Edna had disappeared. 

‘ Tells me she 's had some bother with the buyer or floor 
manager, all something and nothing, but she thinks one or 
two of them there are getting their knife into her, and I 've 
just been telling her to keep quiet a bit and not give any 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


224 

back answers until it 's blown over. Well/ she continued, 
settling back in her chair, after disposing of the stout, ‘I 
think George told you I was going to see Fred Mitty and 
his wife/ 

'He did/ said Mr. Smeeth. 'And how 's cousin Fred? 
What 's brought him here? * 

' I can't quite make out what it is. Something to do with 
advertising and something to do with picture theatres and 
all that. He didn't explain it properly. But he 's looking 
well, and so is his wife, and the daughter. Quite grown up, 
she is, about Edna's age but bigger than Edna. But 
laugh I 1 Her face lit up. ' Laugh I I thought I 'd have 
died. I wish you 'd been there, dad. Oh, dear, dear, 
dear! Fred was always a lively card, never knew him 
when he wasn't, but he gets funnier as he gets older, and 
he set us off to-night and I thought we 'd never have 
stopped. He started taking off a man he knew in Birming- 
ham — I believe he worked for him — and it seems this man 
talks on one side of his mouth, can't help it, you see, and 
Fred started ' 

' I think, if you don't mind, we '11 have all this to-morrow, 
Edie/ said Mr. Smeeth, standing up. ‘I feel like going to 
bed. I 'm tired.' 

'Oh, all right, Mister Methodical,' cried Mrs. Smeeth 
good-naturedly. ‘Fat lot of good it is saving a joke for 
you, isn't it? Never mind, you'll see for yourself on 
Saturday. I '11 ask Fred to do it again. They 're ail 
coming up on Saturday night.' 

'Oh, they are, are they,' said Mr. Smeeth with an entire 
lack of enthusiasm. 

'Oh, I know what you 'd like to say,' she told him, as 
they moved to the door. 'But I had to ask them back, 
hadn't I ? Besides, we 've got to have a bit of life some- 
time.' 

That was true enough. He didn't want to spoil her fun. 
He hadn't told her about the rise yet, and he wasn't sure 
if he was going to tell her. Somebody had to do the worry- 
ing and saving at 17 Chaucer Road. Turn turn turn turn — 
no, he couldn't get it. He turned out the light and fol- 
lowed his wife upstairs. 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 225 

IV 

All the following day, he told himself that he would not 
say a word to Mrs. Smeeth about the extra money until he 
had made arrangements to save most of it. Once he had 
committed himself, it would be safe — though not pleasant 
— to tell her. In the meantime, if she asked him why he 
wasn't getting the rise he had been promised, he would 
have to put her off with some tale or other. That wouldn't 
be very pleasant either and not at all simple. To look at 
Mrs. Smeeth, with her free and easy style, you would think 
she was easy to lie to, but she wasn't — or so it seemed to 
Mr. Smeeth. Whenever he tried he found himself, at his 
age too, still blushing and stammering. But there it was; 
that was the plan. And he spent some of his lunch time, 
all that could be spared from the usual poached egg and 
cup of coffee, ' looking into ' one or two things, insurance and 
National Savings chiefly, and when he returned to the office 
and made a few notes and calculations in his neat little 
script, he felt vaguely rich and rather important for once 
in his life. 

The only person in the office who noticed any change in 
him was Stanley. Stanley's interest in the affairs of Twigg 
and Dersingham, never strong at any time, had almost 
entirely lapsed now that Mr. Golspie was away, and that 
afternoon he found Mr. Smeeth unbearably tyrannical. He 
had to comfort himself by imagining a certain dramatic 
scene in the future, in which Mr. Smeeth, now the victim of 
a desperate gang, called in despair on the great detective, 
S. Poole, only to discover, after bowing humbly, that he 
was face to face with Stanley, the boy he had once bullied 
and despised. 'Yes, Smeeth,' said S. Poole, lighting 
another cigar, 'you little imagined then who it was copying 
your letters and filling your inkwells. But we will let by- 
gones be bygones. Come, I will rid you of these pests/ 
And the great S. Poole, after slipping a revolver into the 
pocket of his fur coat, strode out, followed by an amazed 
and trembling Smeeth. 'Courage, man, courage/ said S. 
Poole, as he climbed into the driving seat of his powerful 
roadster. ‘I can never thank you enough, Mr. Poole ' 

'And just get on with your work, Stanley/ said the same 
voice. But ohl — the difference in intonation. ' I told you 



226 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


those letters have to catch the country post. Be ready to 
slip out with them. Got the envelopes there? ’ 

On his tram, going home, Mr. Smeeth turned the pages 
of his evening paper, looking for those appeals to 'The 
Saving Man' and ‘The Small Investor.' One of the ad- 
vertisements asked him, not for the first time, what he was 
going to do in the Evening of Life, and though he still had 
no answer ready, for once he could look at it without feeling 
himself shrinking somewhere. Already he carried a good 
insurance for a man in his position; he had a bit, for 
emergencies, in the Post Office Savings Bank; and now he 
would have over a pound a week to put away. Now if he 
did that for ten years, fifteen years, perhaps increased it if 
the firm went on doing so well and gave him another rise, 
why, then, surely — and he lost himself in pleasant specu- 
lations. 

He arrived home to find Edna sitting over the fire, hug- 
ging herself in misery, and red and swollen about the eyes. 

‘Hello, hello,' he cried, ‘what’s the matter here?' 

'Lost my job,' Edna mumbled into the fire. 

‘Yes, she's a fine one, isn't she?' And Mrs. Smeeth 
bounced into the room with a saucepan in her hand. ‘I 
told her to be careful, last night, the way they were getting 
their knife into her, and in she comes, half an hour ago, and 
tells me they 've had a regular dust-up and the long and 
short of it all is, my lady 's sacked.' 

‘It wasn't my fault,’ said Edna, who had obviously said 
this a great many times before. 

‘Just you go upstairs and tidy yourself up,' cried her 
mother. ‘Dinner will be ready in a minute and the face 
you 've got now isn't fit to be seen at a table. It would 
put us off our food. And don't start telling me you don't 
want any dinner, just because you 've got sacked. Get 
along upstairs and don’t keep us waiting all night when you 
do get up.' 

‘What's all this about?' Mr. Smeeth asked, with the 
quiet despair of a man who has known something like it 
happen before, and not a few times before. He put on 
that look familiar to all wives, who are left wondering why 
men should imagine Inat domestic life, unlike any other 
kind of life, ought really to be entirely lacking in dis- 
turbing events. 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 227 

'Look at me with this saucepan in my hand/ cried Mrs. 
Smeeth, laughing at herself. 'Just you sit down and keep 
calm, and 1*11 hav<# dinner on the table in a minute, though 
what it '11 be like, Lord only knows, the way I 've been 
badgered and rushed.' 

Left to himself, Mr. Smeeth came to the conclusion once 
again that his wife was to be envied. She made a great 
fuss, far more noise than he ever did, but she didn't really 
dislike these disturbances and strokes of bad luck. Any 
sort of happening, even an apparent misfortune, braced her 
up and left her really enjoying it. What she didn't like 
was a quiet life, the same thing day after day. 

She came in now like a savoury whirlwind. 'Draw up, 
dad. We won’t wait for Edna. She ’ll be down in a 
minute. Help yourself to that stew and take plenty of it 
because the meat 's nearly all bone. Dig down and you 'll 
get the barley, and that '11 do your old inside good.' 

'What 's this about Edna, then?' 

‘Far as I can see, you can’t really blame her, though 
she 's probably been acting a bit too independent. Edna 
is independent, though better that, in the long run, than 
too much the other way. But she 's only a child when 
all 's said and done, and I know she liked the work and 
wanted to stop on there. For two pins, I 'd slip down to 
Finsbury Park to-morrow and give that floor manager or 
whoever he is a piece of my mind. All favouritism really, 
that 's what it boils down to, and of course Edna hadn’t 
been there long and ought to have kept quiet — though a 
girl 's a right to speak up for herself, and I 'd be the last to 
say she hasn't — but they begin picking on her and she 
stands up for herself and lets out one or two things she 
oughtn't to and the next thing is, she 's told to go.' 

This was not a very clear account of how a girl came to 
be suddenly dismissed from an important firm of retail 
drapers, but it seemed to satisfy Mr. Smeeth, who did not 
ask for any details. The truth is, he had gone through this 
scene before, and he knew now that it was not worth trying to 
discover exactly what had happened. Edna returned, look- 
ing her usual self except that she wore a slightly tragic air. 

'When do you finish then, Edna? ' her father asked. 

' This week. And the sooner the better. I wouldn’t go 
to-morrow if I hadn't to get my week's money. Lot of 



228 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


pigs, they are. I knew one or two girls — Ivy Armitage, 
for one — who 's been there and they told me what it was 
like, but of course I wouldn't believe 'em, but it didn't take 
me long to see they weren't talking so silly as I thought/ 
‘And what's the next move, then?' demanded Mr. 
Smeeth, rather wearily. 

'Don't you worry, dad. I 'm not going to stick about 
home long. I '11 find something/ 

‘What she 'd like to do is to go to Madame Rivoli's in the 
High Street,' Mrs. Smeeth explained, ' and learn the business 
properly/ 

'What business? I 'll trouble you for the greens, Edna/ 
‘Millinery. You know Madame Rivoli's in the High 
Street, the place where I got that very nice purple hat of 
mine that fell into the water at Hastings that time? Mrs. 
Talbot keeps it now. You know, her husband died of 
eating oysters about four years ago, and nobody round 
here would touch 'em for months — well, that 's Mrs. Talbot, 
a little woman, looks a bit Frenchified — smart, y' know, 
dad, but overdoes it a bit. I pointed her out to you one 
day, and you said if you 'd legs as thin as that you ’d take 
the trouble to hide 'em and I thought she heard you.' 

‘ And then you talk about me talking, ' cried Edna. ‘ That's 
a nice way to talk, isn't it? And about Mrs. Talbot, too. 
You couldn't want anybody nicer than Mrs. Talbot/ 

‘All we want is for you to mind your own business/ said 
Mrs. Smeeth, forgetting that this really was Edna's business. 
‘But if you want something to do, you can be fetching that 
pudding in and making yourself useful, while I finish this. 
And be careful getting it out. Use the cloth.' 

'And where does Madame Rivoli come in?' asked Mr. 
Smeeth. 

‘She doesn't come in. It's just a name , y’see, dad. 
Miss Murgatroyd had it before Mrs. Talbot. It catches 
people, makes them think all the hats are Paris models. 
For all that, it 's the best little hat shop we 've got about 
here. If you know of a better one in Stoke Newington, 
I 'd like to know where it is, I would really. Only thing 
that keeps me away from that shop is the prices they ask — 
oh, wicked, they are — you might as well go to the West 
End and have done with it. But Mrs. Talbot does a fine 
business — I don't think it 's altogether her shop, I think 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 229 

she just manages it, and somebody told me two Jews really 
owned it. Now then, Edna/ and Mrs. Smeeth sprang to 
her feet and took the pudding from her daughter, ‘just nip 
back for the plates and then we 're all right. There we are. 
It 'll taste better than it looks. This pudding always does. 
Plenty for you, dad? ' 

‘Just middling, mother,' said Mr. Smeeth. 

‘Well, if that isn't enough, you can always come again, 
can't you? What about you, Edna? Don't want any, 
I suppose? Well, you're going to have some. You eat 
that and see if it doesn't make you feel better.' 

‘I've tasted worse/ said Mr. Smeeth judicially. ‘Bit 
heavy, though, isn't it? ' 

‘Oo, mother, you can't have mixed it properly/ cried 
the fastidious Edna. 'It's like lead. It is really. I'll 
have a bit more of the apple, please. I can't eat the crust.' 

‘Now if you 'd been me and I 'd been my mother,' said 
Mrs. Smeeth, with an attempt at severity, ‘you 'd have 
been made to eat what was on your plate a&d not gone 
picking and choosing like that. But it 's not tome out as 
well as it might, I must say.' 

‘Well, to get back to what we were talking about/ said 
Mr. Smeeth, laying down his spoon and shaking his head 
at an offer of more pudding. ‘Where does this Mrs. 
Talbot or Madame Rivoli or whoever it is come in ? What 's 
she got to do with us? I 've forgotten how it all started. 
You go on and on and what with purple hats and oysters 
and legs and Jews, I don’t know where I am. Now then, 
start again, if we must have it.' 

‘Oh, you tell him, Edna, while I go make the tea. And 
for goodness' sake be careful you don't mention purple 
hats and oysters or else your father will be leaving home. 
Old silly!' And Mrs. Smeeth, as deft as a juggler, swept 
herself and half a dozen plates and a few dishes out of 
the room. 

‘It 's like this, dad,' Edna began. ‘My friend, Minnie 
Watson, knows this Mrs. Talbot who 's managing Madame 
Rivoli's because her mother has known her a long time 
and Minnie Watson introduced me to Mrs. Talbot and we 
got on talking and Minnie Watson told her afterwards I 
wanted to go in for the millinery if I could ' 

' Ah, we 're coming to it at last, are we ? ' 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


230 

‘Well, the point is, Mrs. Talbot told Minnie Watson that 
she liked the look of me and that if I wanted to go as an 
apprentice, I could do, and they 'd teach me the business. 
Only I have to go for six months first without getting any 
money at all, and then they 'd pay me something after 
that — not much at the start, but afterwards I could earn 
a lot, because you can if you 're a proper milliner and 
know the business.' 

‘That 's the idea now, you see, dad,' said Mrs. Smeeth, 
coming in with the tea. ‘ Learning the millinery. I don't 
say it 's a bad idea, because it 's not, and, if you ask me, I 
should say Edna had as good a chance of making some- 
thing out of it as any girl I know, because she 's good with 
her fingers — when she cares to use 'em and that 's not often 
in the house — and she likes altering hats, which is more 
than I ever did.' 

‘Everybody says I 'm clever at it,' said Edna, looking 
rather defiant. 

‘I don't know what you mean by “everybody," but 
if you mean your Minnie Watsons and suchlike, I don't 
think whatever they say amounts to much. They 'd tell 
you anything for tuppence. But still, dad, it 's not a 
bad idea — but, as I told her, this apprenticeship business 
is coming a bit hard on us because it 's working for nothing 
and now that she 's been earning money, she 's used to , 
having it to spend, and we 've got to keep her looking 
decent and she '11 still want to be spending something 
and she '11 be bringing nothing in for a long time. You 
say I haven't a head for business, dad — and I dare say I 
haven't and I don't know that I want to have — but I saw 
that as soon as she mentioned it and asked her what she 
thought we were going to get out of it.' 

‘Dad can't talk,' cried Edna, looking across at him tri- 
umphantly, ‘ 'cos he wanted me to be a teacher and if I 'd 
started to be a teacher, I 'd have been going to college 
now, and then he 'd have had to be paying for me, never 
mind me not earning anything.' 

‘Yes, but you didn't want to be a teacher, did you?' 
said Mrs. Smeeth, as if that somehow settled the matter. 

‘Besides, my girl,' Mr. Smeeth began, rather pompously. 

‘Take your tea, dad.' It was a curious thing, but 
whenever Mr. Smeeth had some really dignified state- 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 231 

ment to make, Mrs. Smeeth invariably broke in to hand 
him a cup or a plate or to ask him to put some coal on 
the fire or to see if there was somebody at the front door. 

'Go on, dad, what were you saying? ' said Mrs. Smeeth, 
observing that he was frowning a little at his cup. 

' I was going to say that teaching 's one thing and mil- 
linery 's another thing. If you 'd have decided to be a 
teacher, Edna, I was ready to make a sacrifice to see that 
you became one. Teaching 's a profession. Safe, too. 
Once you become a teacher, you Te safe for the rest of 
your life * 

‘Awful old maids they look too, some of the old ones. 
Lord help us, what a life!' Mrs. Smeeth shuddered, 
shook her head, then smiled at her husband, encourag- 
ing him to continue with his little speech. 

‘But this millinery business is quite a different thing. 
There may be money in it and there may nDt — I don’t 
know. What I do know is, it ’s in a different class alto- 
gether, not the same standing at all. I 'd do for one 
what I wouldn't do for the other. So don't throw that 
teaching affair in my face because it 's outside the argu- 
ment altogether.' 

'Oh, all right.' Edna wriggled her shoulders. 'Don’t 
go on and on about it. If I can't go, I suppose I can’t, 
that ’s all.* She pushed her cup away and rose from the 
table. Then she stopped and looked at them, and Mr. 
Smeeth saw, to his dismay, that her eyes were filling with 
tears. Like that, she looked hardly a day older than she 
had done when he still played childish games with her. 
‘But I did want to go. It 's the only thing I 've really 
wanted to do since I left school. And if I went, I might 
be earning quite a lot in a year or two and some day I might 
be able to have a shop of my own. If George had wanted 
to do something like this, you wouldn’t have said no to 
him— oh ' 

She was making for the door, but her father's shout 
stopped her. 

'Here, wait a minute,' he called out. Then, when she 
halted, he threw a quick glance at her streaming little face, 
looked across at her mother and then down at the table- 
cloth, and said: ‘Well, I suppose you 'd better have a try 
at it then, Edna.' 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


232 

‘ Oo, can I ? * She was all delighted eagerness now, and 
darted across to him. ‘ I can, can't I ? ' 

Awkward, a trifle shamefaced, Mr. Smeeth made a 
movement as if to put his arm round her, but apparently 
thought better of it, and merely patted her nearest shoulder- 
blade. ‘That's all right,' he muttered. ‘That's all 
right.’ 

‘Can I go round and see her now? ’ said Edna, her eyes 
shining and her feet dancing with impatience. Then she 
flew out of the room. 

‘Well, dad,' said Mrs. Smeeth. ‘I won't say I 'm sorry 
you 've decided that way, because I 'm not. I believe it 's 
what she 's wanted some time. She doesn't know whether 
she 's on her head or her heels now. Ah! ' — and she gave 
a tremendous sigh — * I like to see them happy. After all, 
we 've only got to live once ' 

‘ How do you know ? ' demanded her husband. 

'Well, I don't know, if it comes to that, Mister Clever,' 
she retorted good-humouredly. ' All the same, I 've a very 
good idea. But what I wanted to say is this, dad. I wasn't 
going to give her permission to start this business. And 
don't say I persuaded you, because I didn't. You did it 
yourself. You know what it means. She '11 be earning 
next to nothing for a year or two, and though she '11 have 
to pull herself in a bit now she 's not earning anything, she 
can't be kept on nothing. So don’t you turn round on 
me and tell me I don't know that twelve pennies make a 
shilling or something of that sort. It 's your own doing, 
this time. I made up my mind I wouldn't say a word. 
And if you think you can do it all right, well and good; 
I 'm glad.' 

‘Of course I can do it,' he told her, rather indignantly. 
Then out it came. ‘Matter of fact, I've got that 
rise.' 

‘You've not?' 

'Yes, I have.’ 

‘How much? ' 

‘ I 've been put up to three seventy-five, that 's more 
than a pound a week more than I 've been getting.' And 
as he said it, Mr. Smeeth asked himself if he wasn't be- 
having like a complete fool. 

Mrs. Smeeth descended on him impetuously and gave 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 233 

him a resounding kiss. ‘I knew there was something 
coming/ she cried jubilantly. *1 told you about Mrs. 
Dalby’s sister, didn’t I? She told me again that money 
and good luck were coming through a stranger, a middling- 
coloured man in a strange bed. And that was this Mr. 
Golspie of yours, I *11 bet. Nearly four hundred a year, 
isn't it, now? That's something like. My cousin, Fred 
Mitty, was boasting the other night about what he could 
make sometimes, and now this will be something to tell 
him to-morrow night. And fancy you just sitting there 
as if nothing had happened and never saying a word! 
I never knew anybody so close, you old oyster you! 
But that shows what they think of you, doesn't it? And 
you always worrying about your job and talking as if you 
were going to be out in the street next minute!* She ran 
on and on, happy and excited, while he filled his pipe and 
tried to appear very cool and collected. Actually he was 
being pulled two ways. One half of him was gratified, no, 
more than gratified, delighted by her pleasure aind her pride 
in him, and the other half was dubious and demanded to 
know if he realized what he had done. 

‘Now look here, dad,' said Mrs. Smeeth, ‘we must 
celebrate the great occasion somehow to-night. It 's no 
good luck coming to the house if we’re not going to take any 
notice of it. Let 's go out somewhere. Let's enjoy our- 
selves.' 

‘I thought we were going to do that to-morrow,' he told 
her drily, ‘when Fred Mitty and company arrive.' 

‘But that 's different. I mean, just ourselves, just you 
and me. Let 's go and see a good picture or down to the 
second house at Finsbury Park or something like that, 
and sit in the best seats, and you buy yourself a cigar and 
buy me some chocolates for once, and let 's do it properly. 
Come on, boy. What do you say ? ' 

The Saving Man and the Small Investor in Mr. Smeeth 
went down before the affectionate husband and the proud 
male. When she looked at him like that, it would be a sin 
and a shame to refuse her. ‘All right, Edie. You decide 
where you want to go, and we '11 go.' 

'I'll just put George's dinner out and put the dirty 
things under the tap/ she announced breathlessly, flushed 
and bright-eyed, a girl again, ‘and while I 'm doing that. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


234 

you look at the paper and see where you 'd like to go. 
Give me those two cups. No, I can manage. You just 
sit there and have a quiet smoke/ 

He could hear her singing, in her own cheerful vague 
fashion, above the faint clatter of crockery in the kitchen, 
while he had his quiet smoke. He did not look at the paper 
to see where he would like to go. She could decide that, 
and she would soon enough when she had washed up. For 
a week or two, she would be feeling rich and would be 
bringing out all sorts of plans. If by the end of this night 
she had not thought of twenty different ways of getting 
rid of a good deal more than an extra pound or so a week, 
lie would be surprised. She had a weakness for hire pur- 
chase schemes, to begin with, and he detested them, both 
as a man of business and a careful householder. Well, 
after the first excitement had gone he would have to put 
his foot down; no more of these fairy-tale views of life; 
somebody had to do the thinking. Now his thoughts took 
on a sombre colouring. He had never envied the rich their 
luxurious pleasures; he was a simple chap, and their way 
of life seemed to him ridiculous; he did not want a great 
deal for himself; but what he did want — and for this he 
was prepared to envy anybody — was security, to know that 
decency and self-respect were his to the end of his days. 
To be safe in his job while he was fit for it, and after that 
to have a little place of his own, with a garden (he had 
never done any real gardening, but he always found it easy 
to imagine himself doing it very well and enjoying it) and 
a bit of music whenever he wanted it — that was not asking 
much, and yet, for all the firm’s increased turnover and its 
rises, he could not help thinking it was really like asking 
for the moon. 

*'Lo, dad/ cried George, entering briskly. ‘How's 
things? ' 

‘ Pretty good, boy. How 's the car trade ? ' 

‘Not so dusty. You don’t know anybody who 'd like 
to lend me sixty quid, do you, dad? ' 

‘ I don't/ replied Mr. Smeeth very decidedly. 

'Pity/ said George, who showed no signs of disappoint- 
ment. ' If I could put my hand on sixty quid this minute, 
I could make money. A cert. Sounds like horse racing, 
doesn't it, but it isn't ' 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 235 

‘And I should hope not/ said his father, looking at him 
severely. 

* Second-hand car deal. Money for nothing. Ah, well — 
you wait a bit. 1 

'Well, you be careful, with your money for nothing/ 

‘Leave it to me, dad/ said George coolly. 

Mr. Smeeth looked wonderingly at him. It seemed only 
yesterday when he was filling his stocking and putting the 
Meccano set by the boy's bedside. And now — leave it to 
him, sixty quid, a cert! Mr. Smeeth took his pipe out, 
stared at it, and then whistled softly. 


v 

‘Come along, dad/ cried Mrs. Smeeth, pouring out the 
Rich Ruby Port for the ladies. ‘Buck up. Join in the 
fun.' She had herself a rich ruby look, for what with 
eating and drinking and shouting and laughing and singing, 
her face was crimson and almost steaming. 

Unfortunately Mr. Mitty overheard her. ‘That 's right/ 
he roared, drowning every other voice in the room. ' Come 
on, pa. Take you turn. No shirking. Take your turn, 
pa. Show us a conjuring trick.' 

*Oh, shut up, Fred,' Mrs. Mitty screamed, pretending to 
chide him, as usual, and really drawing attention to his 
astonishing drollery. ‘You 've gone far enough/ 

Mr. Smeeth could not do any conjuring, but if he had 
been given unlimited powers, he knew one trick he would 
have liked to perform that instant, a trick that involved 
the immediate disappearance of Mr. Fred Mitty. It was 
Saturday night, the little party was in full swing, and they 
were all in the front room, all, that is, except the Mitty girl 
and Edna, who had gone out together for an hour or so, 
probably round to the pictures. In addition to the Mitty 
pair, there were Dalby and Mrs. Dalby (whose sister told 
fortunes with cards). Mr. Smeeth had seen the room when 
it had had more people in it, but he had never known it 
when it had seemed so full. He had always thought of 
Dalby, who lived at n Chaucer Road, was a bandy-legged 
insurance agent, and fancied himself as a wag and a great 
hand at parties, as a noisy chap, but compared with Fred 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


236 

Mitty he was quiet and decent and merely another Smeeth. 
It had not taken Mr. Smeeth ten minutes to discover that he 
disliked Mitty intensely, and everything that Mitty had 
done and said since (and for the last hour or so he had in- 
sisted on calling Mr. Smeeth ‘pa’) had only increased that 
dislike, which did not stop short at Fred but extended to 
Mrs. Mitty and the girl, Dot. He had never known three 
people he had disliked more. 

Mrs. Smeeth's cousin was a fellow in his early forties who 
had probably not been bad-looking once in a cheap flashy 
style. He had curly fair hair, very small, light-coloured 
greedy eyes, a broken nose, and a large loose mouth that 
went all out to one side when he talked. He reminded Mr. 
Smeeth at once of those cheap auctioneer chaps who take an 
empty shop for a week or two and pretend they are giving 
everything away. Mr. Mitty’s complexion seemed to be per- 
manently rich and ruby, and it had evidently cost somebody 
a good deal in its time, though — as Mr. Smeeth assured him- 
self, vindictively — not necessarily Mr. Mitty himself, who 
clearly brought out visiting with him a colossal thirst and 
appetite. He was a funny man, a determined wag, and the 
noisiest Mr. Smeeth had ever known. He shouted all the 
time, just like one of those cheap auctioneers. His jokes 
gave you a pain in the stomach and his voice a headache. 
Moreover, he seemed to Mr. Smeeth quite obviously a silly 
boaster, a liar, and a man not to be trusted a yard. Such 
men frequently ally themselves to quiet little women, but 
Fred Mitty — fortunately for some quiet little woman — had 
found a female of his own kind. Mrs. Mitty, who had a 
long blue nose and hair that was bright auburn at the ends 
and grey-brown near the roots, was as brassy as her hus- 
band. Her scream accompanied his roar. If she said 
anything playful to you, she hit your nearest rib with her 
bony elbow; and if you said anything playful to her, she 
slapped you on the arm. Here she differed from Fred, 
who banged you on the back and poked you in the ribs, 
unless ydu were a woman and not too old, and then he 
hugged you or invited you to sit on his knee. Dot, the 
solitary offspring of this brassy pair, was about Edna's age 
and was all legs and golden curls and a hard blue stare. 
She talked of becoming a film actress. Mr. Smeeth, who 
did not know much about Hollywood, but nevertheless had 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 237 

a horror of the place, told her quite sincerely that he hoped 
she would get there, and added, with perfect truth, that she 
reminded him of those Broadway girls on the pictures. 
Edna of course — the silly child — had been fascinated at 
once by Dot; and as for Mrs. Smeeth, who really had no 
more sense about people at times than a baby, she seemed 
to be infatuated with all three of them. 

‘Will you have a little port wine, Mrs. Dalby? ' said Mr. 
Smeeth, who felt that he must do something. 

'Just the tiniest, weeniest sip, Mr. Smeeth/ she replied. 
And when he had brought her the Rich Ruby, she con- 
tinued: ‘Lively to-night, aren't we? ' 

‘Very/ he told her. 

She gave him a quick look. ‘ Well, it 's nice to see people 
enjoying themselves. But you look a bit tired to-night, 
Mr. Smeeth/ 

‘Oh, I don't know — do I? Feel all right, y'know, Mrs. 
Dalby/ Did he feel all right? What about that little 
tick-tick of pain somewhere inside him ? ' I 've been work- 

ing hard just lately. We 've been busy, for 0 nte/ 

'You 're inside all the time, aren't you? ' said Mrs. Dalby 
seriously and sympathetically. ‘And that 's what tells on 
you. Tom works very hard — though you wouldn't think 
so, to hear him talk — but he 's out most of the time, on his 
round, you know, and so it 's not so bad for him, unless we 
get a spell of nasty damp weather and then he begins to 
feel it in the chest. He 's had chest trouble before.' 

'Has he really? * said Mr. Smeeth. This was not a very 
cheerful conversation, but nevertheless it pleased him. 
Mrs. Dalby was a nice quiet ladylike sort of woman, and 
talking to her in this company was like having a few words 
with a sane person in a madhouse. 

‘That's right, Fred,' Mrs. Smeeth shouted. 'Do help 
yourself.' 

‘Trust met' roared Fred, who was pouring himself out 
some whisky. Yes, there was a bottle of whisky, as well 
as some beer and the Rich Ruby. So far as Mr. Smeeth 
could see, half the week's housekeeping money must have 
been spent on this racket. 

‘Yes, trust '**»/ screamed Mrs. Fred, putting down her 
empty glass. ‘If you don't take that bottle away from 
him, he 'll have it all before you know where you are/ 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


238 

'Ah like ma droap o' Scoatch, d' ye ken/ Fred bellowed 
in a very hoarse voice and in what he imagined to be a 
Scots accent. 'Wha' day ye say, Meesees Macphairson? 
Hoch aye ! ' 

‘Oh, stop it, Fred/ cried his wife. 

‘Good as a turn, you are, Fred/ said Mrs. Smeeth 
admiringly. 

‘Reminds me of the chap from Aberdeen/ Dalby began. 
But it was no use. It was not his evening. 

‘There was a Scottie I knew in Brum/ Fred shouted. 

Mrs. Fred let out a piercing shriek. ‘ Oh, yes, tell 'em 
about him.' 

Fred did, but Mr. Smeeth, by a tremendous effort, con- 
trived not to listen, although Fred's voice more than 
filled the room. Indeed, there was so much of it that it 
was possible not to take it in properly. Mr. Smeeth 
thought about other things, and paid no attention until 
he suddenly discovered that he was being addressed. 

'Yes, do let's have that,' cried Mrs. Smeeth, her face 
very red and her eyes moist with laughter. ‘Y' know, 
that one you did the other night for me — that man in 
Birmingham. Laugh ! I thought I 'd have died. Dad, 
you remember me telling you ? Do listen to this.' 

‘That *s right, pa/ roared Fred, with mock severity. 
‘ A little of your attention, please, while I endeavour to give 
you a slight impersonation of — Mis-ter Snook-um of Brum.' 

‘That wasn't his real name, you know/ Mrs. Fred 
screamed, turning on Mr. Smeeth so that he got the full 
force of it. ‘That was the name these chaps gave him. 
Do it properly, Fred, this time. Dress up for it.' 

‘Shall I? What about it?' 

‘Yes, go on, do. Like you did that time at Mr. Slings- 
by's. I '11 tell you all about that night in a minute,' Mrs. 
Fred added, with the air of one about to confer a great 
favour. ‘That was a night. But go on, Fred.' 

‘All right,' replied Fred, noisily finishing his whisky. 
'I will — by special request.' 

'Looks as though we 're going to have a performance/ 
said Dalby, not very pleasantly. There had been rather 
too much of Fred for his taste. 

‘That's right/ Fred shouted at him, not too pleas- 
antly either. ‘ Any ob j ections ? ' 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 239 

'Hurry up, Fred/ cried Mrs. Smeeth beaming at him. 
* We 're all waiting/ 

'Allow me one minute in which to change my costume/ 
Fred replied, 'and I will oblige/ And out he went, and 
the others were moved about to allow a clear space near 
the door, and Mrs. Dalby and Mrs Mitty were pressed to 
take a little more of the Rich Ruby or to have a sandwich 
or a piece of cake, and Mrs. Dalby had a sandwich and 
Mrs. Mitty, whose long nose was a much deeper shade of 
blue than it had originally been, accepted another glass of 
the Rich Ruby. 

‘I ought to tell you that this chap he 's going to take 
off/ Mrs. Fred explained to them, 'was a chap Fred had 
some business dealings with in Birmingham. He owned 
one of the picture theatres there. He wasn't a bad sort 
of chap really, but he was an absolute comic — didn't mean 
to be, y' know, didn’t know he was funny — but he was, 
and Fred and the other fellows used to make gajne of him. 
To start with, he always talked, you see, with 'his mouth 
on one side * 

'Well, so does Fred/ said Mr. Smeeth, bluntly and 
boldly. 

'Now, dad/ cried Mrs. Smeeth, ‘how can yoti say that! ' 

'That's right, Mrs. Smeeth,' said Dalby. ‘He does 
talk with his mouth on one side. I noticed it myself. 
Just a habit, you know. Easy to get into. Probably 
you never notice it now,' he remarked considerately to 
Mrs. Fred. 'You've got used to it.' 

‘ Oh, that 's quite different,' she said stiffly. But she 
did not continue with her explanation. 'Wait till he 
comes in. You '11 see what I mean.' 

What Mr. Smeeth did see when Fred came in was that 
Fred was wearing his best overcoat and hat. He must 
have chosen these things because they were obviously too 
small for him and so added to the comic effect. The coat 
was strained across his shoulders, and the hat, a good grey 
soft felt, which Mr. Smeeth only wore at the week-end and 
for special occasions, had been jammed on his head and 
punched in at the top in a horrible manner. Mr. Smeeth 
was so annoyed he could hardly sit still. 

'Good evening, you people/ said Fred, speaking in a 
queer voice and throwing his mouth round to the other 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


240 

side. 'I 'm Mister Snookums of Brum, and I 'd loike you 
to understand that I 'm the propreeotor of the Luxydrome 
Peecture Palaice, situated in one of our main thorough- 
fares of the city and built ree-gardless of expense. Hem!' 
Here Fred coughed in a silly way, with a quick movement 
of one hand to his mouth, a movement that nearly split 
the seams of the overcoat. His wife and Mrs. Smeeth 
shrieked with laughter; Dalby and his wife smiled; and 
Mr. Smeeth merely looked glum. This went on for sev- 
eral minutes, at the end of which, Fred, in a frantic attempt 
to capture the whole audience, was shouting at the top of 
his voice, nearly bursting the overcoat, and punching the 
hat out of any recognizable shape. At last, Mr. Smeeth 
could stand it no longer. 

'Just a minute/ he said, advancing upon Fred. ‘I 'm 
sorry to interrupt, if you 've not finished. But, y' know, 
that 's my hat, my best hat — when you 've done with it/ 
And he held out his hand for it. 

‘All right, old sport/ said Fred, giving it to him and re- 
suming his normal appearance. 'No damage done. And 
ber-lieve me, people/ he added, mopping his brow, ‘that 's 
nearly like work. Yes, I think I will, Cousin Edie.' And 
he made for the whisky. 

Edna and Dot returned now from the pictures. It was 
Dot's turn to entertain the company. ‘Oo, I say/ she 
cried, like a suddenly galvanized doll, ‘Oo, I say, you 
ought er see Ducie Dell wood in this picture we 've just 
seen. A college girl, what they call over there a co-ed.' 

‘I thought she was sorful/ said Edna. ‘Didn't you, 
Dot?' 

‘I didn't like her much. This was her. Watch me, 
everybody. Just watch me a minute. This was her.' 
And Dot, after screaming everybody into attention, began 
jazzing about and rolling her eyes and flinging herself into 
a chair and then jumping out of it again. ‘ That song 's in 
this picture, mother/ she gasped. ‘You know — what is 
it — It *s Necking or Nothing Now — and Ducie Dellwood 
sings it — like this.' She stood facing them with her legs 
apart and knees bent, crooked her elbows, spread out her 
fingers, then swayed as she sang, or tried to sing in a little 
nasal voice, what she remembered of the song. Mr. 
Smeetfy, after noticing that Edna was regarding this per- 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 241 

formance with open admiration, told himself that in spite 
of the fact that he was a quiet and good-tempered man, he 
would dearly like to get up and give this Dot girl a good box 
on the ears and then pack her off to bed. 

'Well, I really think we 'd better be getting along now/ 
said Mrs. Dalby. 

'Yes’, time to be off/ said her husband. 

'No, don't go yet, Mrs. Dalby/ cried Mrs. Smeeth. 

‘The night is yet young/ roared Fred. 'I thought you 
London people kept it up till all hours. Why, up in Brum, 
when a few of us got together, some of the bo-hoys and 
some of the ger-hirls, we used to be settling down to it now, 
I give you my word.' 

' And how much longer does he think he 's going to stay 
here?' Mr. Smeeth asked himself bitterly, as the irrepres- 
sible Fred went roaring on. Mrs. Dalby was firm about 
going and edged towards the door, smiling at her hostess; 
Dalby followed her, and when they did finally go, Mr. 
Smeeth, glad to escape even for a minute or two, saw them 
to the door. The night was beautifully dark and quiet, 
delighted in its entire lack of Mitties. 

'Lively card, all right/ said Dalby, as they halted a 
moment. 

'A bit too lively for me/ said Mr. Smeeth in a low con- 
fidential tone. 'A little of him goes a long way, it seems 
to me. Mrs. Smeeth's cousin, y'know,' he added, dis- 
claiming all responsibility. 

'Well, to be quite truthful, Mr. Smeeth/ Mrs. Dalby 
declared, * I must say I thought the way they allowed that 
girl to carry on was ridiculous. My words, if she 'd been 
a girl of mine ! ' 

'Or mine/ said Mr. Smeeth grimly. 

'Still, we 've had a very enjoyable evening, haven't we, 
Tom? 1 said Mrs. Dalby, who had plainly had nothing of the 
kind but was a polite woman. 

After they had said good night, Mr. Smeeth remained at 
the door for a few minutes, enjoying the quiet and the cool 
fresh air. When he returned to the others, he made 
straight for the fire and raked it together with the poker, 
but did not put any more coal on it. Then he yawned 
once or twice, and did not try very hard to pretend he was 
not yawning. Ten minutes later, he told Edna to get 



242 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

upstairs to bed, pointing out very firmly that on any other 
nights he would have been there some time. There were 
signs then, after Edna had reluctantly and with much 
wriggling of shoulders taken her departure, that the Mitty 
family was about to go, but unfortunately George made 
his appearance and that kept them another half-hour, to- 
wards the end of which Mr. Smeeth merely stared at them 
in despair. When they did go Mrs. Smeeth and George 
saw them to the door, and Mr. Smeeth stayed where 
he was. 

Somehow the room looked as if fifty people had been 
eating and drinking and smoking in it for days. There 
were two sandwiches and a flattened cigarette end on the 
carpet ; somebody had spilled some port on the little table ; 
there was the glass that Fred had broken ; there were the 
forlorn bottles, the dirty glasses, the remnants of food, 
cigarette ash, the smoke rapidly going stale: the whole 
room, the pride of the house and as nice a parlour as you 
would find in the length of Chaucer Road, looked tipsy, 
bedraggled and forlorn, and as its disgusted owner wearily 
moved about, throwing bits of stuff into the fire and 
straightening things, he felt as if the Mitty crew had left 
their sign and mark on it for ever. He threw open the 
windows and was just in time to hear from outside the last 
good nights. 

His wife came in. ‘George has gone to bed,' she an- 
nounced. 1 1 was telling liim he seemed quite struck with 
young Dot.* 

Mr. Smeeth grunted. 

She followed her usual practice on these occasions, Sitting 
down by the fire with a last sandwich, prepared for a cosy 
little gossip about the evening. * I 'm not going to touch 
a thing to-night. It 'll have to wait until the morning. 
Well, well, I must say I've enjoyed myself to-night; 
whether other people have or not.' For a moment her face 
was alight with reminiscent mirth, that pleasant afterglow 
of jolly evenings, but it died out as she looked at her 
husband. ‘But I must say too, dad, I never saw you in 
such a mood. I expect you thought I wasn't noticing you, 
but I was. Couldn't help it. Quite grumpy you were, half 
the time, and downright rude, if you ask me, once or twice.’ 
Fred's wife noticed it, too.' 



MR. SMEETH GETS HIS RISE 243 

Mr. Smeeth mumbled something to the effect that he 
did not much care what Fred's wife noticed. 

‘Perhaps you're tired, are you, boy?' she said, her 
manner changing. ‘I thought once or twice you looked 
tired, and Mrs. Dalby told me she thought you were looking 
a bit tired to-night.' 

*1 expect I am,' said Mr. Smeeth. 

'Ah, well, that's different, isn't it, when you're tired 
and you don't feel in the humour for it ? Never mind, next 
time I expect you '11 be ready to join in the fun. They 've 
asked us all down for one night next week — they '11 let us 
know which night — to meet some people they know who 
used to be in Birmingham too.' 

'Well, I hope you told them I wasn’t going.' 

'Of course I didn't, dad. The very idea!' 

'Well, I 'm not going.' 

' Why, what for ? ' 

'Because I 'm not. If you want to know/ Mr. Smeeth 
added, his voice trembling, ' I 've had quite enough of 'em 
here to-night, without going to look for some more.' 

His wife looked at him indignantly and sat up straight. 
'That 's a nice way to talk, isn't it ? What harm have they 
done you? It 's not Fred’s fault — or his wife's fault — if 
you didn't enjoy yourself to-night.’ 

'It is. If it 's not their fault, whose fault is it?' Mr. 
Smeeth retorted. 'I can't stand him — and I can't stand 
his wife — and I can't stand that jazzing girl of theirs either. 
And the less Edna, or George, for that matter, sees of 
that little ' 

'Now just you be careful what you 're saying,' cried 
Mrs. Smeeth. 'You'll be saying something in a minute 
you *11 be sorry for afterwards. Now, dad, you 're tired 
to-night, and I expect they were a bit too noisy for you. 
Fred does get noisy when he gets going, I '11 admit. But 
you '11 feel different about it in the morning. Let 's go to 
bed/ 

‘All right. I 'm ready. But understand this, Edie. 
I 'm not going down to Fred Mitty's this next week or any 
other week. If you want to go, I can't stop you, and if 
you want to ask them here again, I suppose I can't stop 
you — though if he starts coming here regularly, drinking 
the amount of whisky he drank to-night, I 'm going to 

1959 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


244 

have something to say. But he doesn’t see me again for 
a long time, I can tell you that.’ 

‘The way you talk! ' said Mrs. Smeeth on her way to the 
door. 'But I 'm not going to argue with you to-night. 
I ’m tired myself and I 'm sure you ’re so tired you don’t 
know what you are saying. I ’ll leave you to lock up, dad.’ 

No doubt he was tired. He was still trembling a little as 
he went round, turning off the lights and seeing that both 
outside doors were locked and bolted; but his mind was 
made up on the Mitty question. There is a certain pleasure 
in making up your mind, putting your foot down, taking a 
firm stand, especially if, like Mr. Smeeth, you do it very 
rarely, not being a wilful or autocratic man; and as he 
walked along the dark little hall and climbed the stairs, 
Mr. Smeeth experienced that pleasure, and the hand that 
he placed on the banisters was that of a strong determined 
man, the natural head of a house. Yet even before he had 
reached the bedroom door, there was mixed with that 
pleasure, absorbing it gradually, an uneasiness, a faint 
foreboding, a sense of worse things to come. 



CHAPTER VII 


ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 
I 

' Yersh,’ said Mr. Pelumpton, staring at Turgis and pulling 
hard at his little pipe, which replied with a sickening gurgle, 
‘yersh, that ’sh what you want, boy, shome short of 'obby, 
to parsh the time — shee? ’ 

‘That 's right,’ cried little Mrs. Pelumpton, sitting down 
but only on the edge of the chair to show that this was a 
mere breathing space in the long battle with beds and 
stairs and dirty plates and potatoes and legs of mutton. 
‘You oughter get out of yourself more, Mr. Turgis— if you 
catch my meaning. That ’s what you ’re telling him, 
isn’t it?’ 

‘Yersh,’ said Mr. Pelumpton, who was busy now poking 
at his pipe with a very large hairpin. 

‘Oh — I dunno,’ said Turgis, vaguely and mournfully. 

‘Look at Edgar,’ Mrs. Pelumpton continued. ‘What 
with 'arriering — y’ know, a lot of ’em all running together, 
miles and miles, and not as much on as you might go in the 
water with if you was at the seaside— though he 'asn’t 
done much of that lately ’ 

‘Don’t blame him,’ Turgis muttered, shuddering. The 
last thing on earth he wanted was to be a harrier, who not 
only ran and ran until he nearly dropped but also contrived 
to look silly. Ugh I 

' What with that and now these racing dog dirt tracks — 

‘Hear that,’ Mr. Pelumpton broke in, pointing a derisive 
pipe-stem, ‘d’hear that, Mishter Turgish? Dog dirt 
tracksh! That'sh a good one. You've got it wrong, 
mother. Nobody 'd pay to shee a dog dirt tracksh, you 
can shee them any time, outshide in the shtreet. Plenty of 
’em round ’ere. That makesh me laugh, that doesh.' And 
to show that it did, he cackled a little. 

'It wouldn’t take much to make you laugh. But you 
know what I mean? ’ and she turned to Turgis. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


246 

'Greyhound racing/ 

'That's right/ cried Mrs. Pelumpton triumphantly. 
* He goes to see 'em once or twice a week — never misses — 
and though it costs money ' 

* Yersh/ said Mr. Pelumpton. ‘Think it doesh. It 'sh a 
betting bishnish — shame ash 'orsh racing, a betting bishnish.' 

‘Oh, is it?' Mrs. Pelumpton was thoughtful. ‘Well, 
that's not as good as it might be, is it? I don't want 
Edgar starting with them betting tricks — two to one each 
way and all that. Never any good came of that , in my 
opinion.' 

‘A mug's game,' said Turgis, with the air of a rather 
gloomy man of the world. 

'I thought they just went to see the dogs run about, just 
a bit of fun,' Mrs. Pelumpton continued, dubiously. Then 
she brightened. 'But I can trust Edgar to behave and not 
do anything silly.' 

'Yersh, yersh. Matter of a bob or two, that 'sh all. 
The boy'sh all right. Mindjew, for my part, I never 
cared for thish betting game, neither 'orshesh or anything 
elsh. Wouldn't touch it. Fellersh 'ave shaid to me, “You 
put all you 've got on sho-an'-sho — it 'sh a shert," — but 
I 've told 'em “No." Matter of prinshiple, shee? I don't 
want the bookiesh' money and they 're not going to 'ave 
my money. What I 've made,* Mr. Pelumpton added, 
apparently under the impression that he had made whole 
fortunes in his time, ‘I've honeshtly earned. There 'sh 
quite enough gambling in the dealing bishnish for me, 
quite enough.' 

‘Well, I 'd rather see Edgar going up there, even if it 
means he 's putting his shillings on now and then/ said 
Mrs. Pelumpton, getting up, 'than see him going round the 
pubs. That 's an expensive 'obby, if you like. And you 
can't say you 've never had a try at that, dad. If you ever 
had any principles against the publicans 'aving your money, 
all I can say is they never took you very far. What you 've 
honestly earned you 've mostly honestly spent too.' And 
Mrs. Pelumpton waddled into the kitchen. 

'Yersh,' said Mr. Pelumpton, completely ignoring his 
wife's speech and now fixing Turgis with his watery stare, 
'quite enough gambling in the dealing bishnish for me. 
Now here 'sh an inshtansh/ 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 247 

'Oh, blow you and your instances!' Turgis cried to 
himself. 

' Chesht o' drawersh going up in Holloway and I 'm re- 
quested to 'ave a look at it. Very pretty piesh, very pretty 
piesh. Worth money, that piesh. I 'm tellin' you now 
what I thought, at the time. I went back and shaw Mishter 
Peek an* tellsh him that piesh 'sh worth a ten pound note if 
it 'sh worth a penny. " Go back," he shaysh, " and go right 
up to sheven if nesheshary." I go back and thish piesh 'sh 
gone. Old Craggy up the road there had bought it — 'ad 
to pay sheven, too — an' I could have kicked myshelf. Well, 
that 'sh what?— oh, eight munsh, ten munsh, a year ago. 
All right. I 'm looking round in old Craggy'sh the other 
day and what do I shee — the very shame piesh. I shaysh 
to 'im, "I know that piesh," and I told him 'ow and why I 
did know it. Then I shaysh to him, "What you wanting 
now for that piesh? " An' what do you think he shaid? ' 

'Fifty pounds,' said Turgis promptly. He had heard 
this type of story many, many times from Mif. Pelumpton. 

‘Now that 'sh jusht where you 're wrong, boy,’ cried Mr. 
Pelumpton, delighted. ‘Jusht where you 're wrong. Not 
fifty poundsh but five poundsh, two lesh than he 'd given 
for it. Couldn't get rid of it — shee? — and had pulled it 
down and down — and I give you my word, I believe I could 
have 'ad that piesh from him for four — he was sho shick of 
sheeing it about the shop. And I 'd have bought it for 
sheven, sho would Mishter Peek, sho would you, sho would 
anybody. It jusht showsh you. The dealing bishnish ish 
a gamble.' 

‘If you ask me,' said Turgis, all gloomy and profound, 
4 it 's all a gamble.' 

‘Well, don't loosh ’eart, boy, don't loosh 'eart. Take a 
ninterest in thingsh like I do. Shtart a nobby ' 

‘What 's your hobby? ' asked Turgis, not too graciously. 
And he immediately gave himself the answer silently: 
‘Finding free beer, you old soak, that 's your hobby.' 

‘ My work ish my 'obby now,' replied Mr. Pelumpton very 
solemnly. ‘In my time, I've 'ad all manner of 'obbiesh, 
from pigeonsh to joining the volunteersh, but now my work 
ish my 'obby. It 'sh not only my work but my play, ash 
you might shay. And if you 're going to make anything 
at all out of dealing, if you 're going to be a real dealer. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


248 

that 'sh the only way to do it — make it a full time job, 
wherever you are, be on the look-out, keep your eyesh 
open, your earsh open, turn thingsh over in your mind. If 
you 'd a bit more money, d' you know what I 'd shay to 
you?' 

Turgis could think of several things that Mr. Pelumpton 
would say to him, the very minute he had some more 
money, but he was certain that not one of them was in Mr. 
Pelumpton's thoughts at the moment. So he merely shook 
his head. 

' What I 'd shay to you ish — shtart collecting. In a 
shmall way, y' know, to begin with. Doeshn't matter what 
you collect. And I 'd put you on to thingsh. That 'sh 
where you 'd be lucky 'cosh you 'd 'ave the benefit of my 
experiensh and knowledge of the trade.' 

Turgis did not think he would care very much for 
collecting, and Mrs. Pelumpton, returning at that moment, 
wiping her hands on an apron, said that she didn't think 
much of collecting either. 'Just wasting your money and 
littering the place up, that would be,' she added. ' So don't 
you go and put ideas into his head, dad. I 'd sooner see you 
taking an interest in these politics, same as Mr. Park.' 

* You know what he ish, Mishter Park ? ' said her husband. 
‘He 'sh a Bolshie, that 'sh what he ish.' 

‘Well, it keeps him quiet enough,' Mrs. Pelumpton re- 
torted. ‘And sober, too. Never makes any noise or 
trouble. Nobody will make me believe he 's a real Bolshie, 
a nice quiet young chap like that. And he 's never been 
to Russia, never once set eyes on it. He told me so 
himself.' 

‘That doeshn't matter,' said Mr. Pelumpton. 

‘What does matter then?' asked Mrs. Pelumpton 
triumphantly. 

No doubt her husband could have told her, but he did 
not choose to; he merely made a contemptuous noise, and 
then took up the evening paper. Turgis decided to go to 
bed. It was not late, but there was nothing to do. He 
was tired of talking to the Pelumptons, though he felt 
vaguely grateful to them, or at least to Mrs. Pelumpton, 
for taking an interest in him. What they actually said 
did not mean much to him — for he did not want any of 
their silly hobbies and had not the slightest desire to be 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 249 

like either Edgar or Park — but it was pleasant to feel that 
somebody was interested in him. His father took no 
interest in him, hadn't done for years, and he had no other 
near relations. They didn't care much about him at the 
office. Even Poppy-with-the-fringe had kept away from 
him lately, and the others simply took him for granted. 
He had no friends. He was just a chap in the crowd. 
Nearly all his time away from the office was spent in a 
crowd somewhere, getting back to his lodgings in the 
packed Tube, returning to the thronged streets afterwards, 
perhaps eating in some crowded place, then waiting in a 
queue to get in a picture theatre, making one of a huge 
audience, wandering along the lamp-lit pavements, and he 
was for ever surrounded by strange, indifferent or hostile 
faces, looking into millions of eyes that never lit up with 
any gleam of recognition, and spending hour after hour in 
the very thick of packed humanity without exchanging a 
single word with anybody. His existence was noticed only 
when he bought something, when he turned himself into a 
customer. 

And yet, of course, this was not entirely true. There 
were innumerable people in London who were not only 
ready to make the acquaintance of Turgis, but were 
actually longing for him. There were Park's comrades, 
the Communists, who would be only too glad to obtain 
another recruit; possibly the Socialists; and certainly the 
Anti - Socialists, who would have been delighted to show 
him how to mount a soap-box. There were clergymen of 
all denominations and sects on the prowl for him, willing to 
lead him in prayer, to instruct him in the Scriptures, to 
teach him anthems, to show him lantern slides of the 
Norfolk Broads, to smoke a manly pipe at him, to play a 
game of chess, draughts, dominoes, bagatelle, or billiards 
with him, to give him a right hook and then a straight left 
with the gloves on, according to their varied tastes and 
dispositions. There were men who were not clergymen, 
but had the habits and outlook of clergymen, leaders of 
ethical societies and the like, who would be pleased to talk 
to him about their own particular universe, lend him a few 
books, and welcome him twice a week at their philosophical* 
literary-musical services. No doubt there were criminals 
who could have made good use of a youth with such a 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


250 

guileless air. There were thousands of other young men in 
lodgings and offices, young men who were not very clever 
or strong or handsome or brave or artful, young men who 
were for ever packing themselves into tubes and buses, 
eating hastily in comers of crowded teashops, and then 
using the music-halls, picture theatres, saloon bars and 
lighted streets as their drawing-rooms, studies, and clubs, 
who would soon have been overjoyed, once the mumbling 
preliminaries were passed, to spend their evenings with 
Turgis. 

But then he did not really want any of these people, did 
not want company for company's sake. What he really 
wanted was Love, Romance, a Wonderful Girl of His Own. 
And these had lately all been assuming the same shape in 
his mind, that of Miss Lena Golspie. He had never spoken 
to her, had never seen her except once, at a distance, since 
that day she appeared at the office, but he had thought a 
great deal about her. To say that he had fallen in love 
with her at sight would be to exaggerate. If an attrac- 
tive girl — and she need not have been anything like as 
pretty as Miss Golspie — had turned up and had been kind 
to him, no doubt he would soon have forgotten all about 
Lena. But no such girl turned up ; indeed no girl of any 
kind appeared. If Lena Golspie was not the prettiest girl 
he had ever seen (and he could not remember a prettier, 
not even if he included the beautiful shadow people, Lulu 
Castellar and the other film stars), she was certainly the 
prettiest girl he had ever spoken to, and the fact that she 
had actually made her appearance at the office door in 
Angel Pavement somehow brought her definitely into his 
own world. That she was not really a creature of that 
world only made her more fascinating, mysterious, ro- 
mantic, like the beautiful heroine of a love story of the 
films. She was a lovely bird of passage. He imagined 
her against a background of strange places and fantastic 
luxuries. It was as if Lulu Castellar had stepped out of 
the screen, taken on colour and solid shape, and had act- 
ually spoken to him, smiled at him. And yet, there it was, 
her father worked in the very same business, in the very 
same office, with him. No wonder he could not get the 
girl out of his head, which for a long time now had been 
haunted by a vague but infinitely desirable feminine shape. 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 251 

It was vague no longer; it had definite form and features; 
it had a name. 

It had also an address, and Turgis, his wits suddenly 
sharpened, had contrived to learn it at the office. The 
Golspies lived at 4a Carrington Villas, Maida Vale, W.9. 
He had seen the very house, or rather the upper half of 
the house, in which they lived. He had, in fact, seen it 
several times, and had actually been watching when 
lights were being turned on and off there. Before this, 
Maida Vale had been for him a mere name, but now he 
was rapidly becoming familiar with the district, and it 
had for him a most curious fascination. He had never 
really decided what he would do if he was lucky enough 
to run into Miss Golspie. She had been friendly that day 
she came to the office, though condescending to him, of 
course, as she had every right to do; but on the strength 
of that, he did not see how he could very well stop her, 
perhaps in one of the darkest parts of Carrington Villas, 
and say: 'Do you remember me. I ’m Tui^is and I 'm 
the clerk at Twigg and Dersingham’s. And flow are you. 
Miss Golspie? 1 And if he wasn’t to do that, "what was he 
to do ? He did not know, and so left it to the inspiration 
of the moment. That moment never arrived. He was 
not very surprised or disappointed. He went across to 
Maida Vale several nights, not so much because he felt he 
had a good chance of meeting her there or even of seeing 
her, but because on these particular evenings every other 
part of London seemed terribly dreary, and Maida Vale 
drew him across these desolated spaces like a magnet. He 
only went when it was fine, and then he took a turn or 
two up and down Carrington Villas, sometimes stopping 
near the house to see if anything was happening there (it 
was a detached house with two pillars before the door and 
three steps leading up to it, and there was a broken statue 
in the dingy bit of garden in front), perhaps walked along 
the street at the top a little way, towards the main road, 
then did the same at the bottom, had p last saunter along 
Carrington Villas, perhaps ended up with a glass of bitter 
at the high-class little pub just round the comer at the top, 
and went home. The first few evenings he had spent like 
that he had enjoyed; there was to him something enchant- 
ingly mysterious and romantic in the winter evening gloom 

*1 93* 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


252 

of this Maida Vale; as he moved about the quiet streets, a 
shadow among shadows, he became aware of an intense 
secret inner life of his own; but the pleasure rapidly de- 
creased. Too often the upper half of the house was all 
dark, and then of course the whole neighbourhood lost 
its charm, which was transferred to some other, unknown, 
part of the city, where she was spending the evening. Prob- 
ably in the West End, that brilliant jungle, where you 
might meet anybody, the last person in the world you ex- 
pected to meet, and where you might miss for ever the one 
person you wanted to meet. It was in the West End he 
caught sight of her. He had been to a picture theatre and 
it was late, and he saw her with her father and another 
man. Mr. Golspie was shouting for a taxi, and in another 
moment he had got one and they were gone. But he saw 
her distinctly, and it was strange seeing her, for though he 
had thought so much about her, she had almost stopped 
being real. 

He was beginning to mope now, for he was tired of going 
over to Maida Vale, and yet could not settle down to spend 
his evenings in the old way, and that was why the Pelump- 
tons, seeing him hanging about and looking vaguely mis- 
erable, had begun to give him advice about hobbies. They 
did not understand, he told himself gloomily, that he 
wasn’t simply another Edgar or Park. But he admitted 
once again that it was decent of them to take an interest 
in him, even if they missed the great fact about him — 
namely, that he was entirely different from Edgar or Park 
or anybody else they knew. The innermost self of Turgis 
was always being surprised and hurt by the general ignor- 
ance of this simple fact. Having reached his little room, 
he now did what he had done many hundreds of times 
before: he examined his face carefully in the tiny cracked 
mirror to see if there were any signs of this difference 
written there; and once again he came to the conclusion 
that there were, only you had to look closely and sym- 
pathetically at him, not just give a hard stare and then 
march off, to notice them. 

For once, the little gas-fire did not explode when the 
match came near and then wheezily complain. It gave 
only a soft pop and then merely murmured. Its master 
knew that that meant that the meter demanded another 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 253 

shilling, and as he had not got a shilling and was too lazy 
to return to the back room for possible change, he let it 
murmur and sink, until its flames were like tiny blue 
flowers. Then he did something he had not done hundreds 
of times before. He began brushing his clothes. Mr. 
Smeeth had already noticed, as we saw, that Turgis had 
smartened himself up. We are now behind the scenes of 
this smartening. It had occurred to Turgis that his next 
meeting with Lena Golspie, if there ever was one, might 
easily take place in the office, like the first meeting, and 
then he realized at once that he would have to take some 
trouble with his appearance during the day. He went to 
the length of spending one and threepence on a clothes 
brush of his own. A day or two later, he went to the 
further length of buying a few collars, very smart soft 
collars with long points on them, and was quite surprised 
at the difference they made. Then he had taken to 
folding his trousers and putting them under the mattress, 
and had even taken his better pair downstairs once and 
ironed them. Now, after brushing the coat and waist- 
coat and doing a little scratching here and there with his 
penknife, he took these trousers from under the mattress 
and thoroughly examined them. 

He sat down on the edge of his bed, the trousers over his 
arm, staring at the large hole in the old rug. But he was 
not looking at the hole but through it, into Angel Pavement, 
into the office. Mr. Golspie had just gone away, and now 
Turgis suddenly realized that that fact was tremendously 
important. It might mean that there was no chance what- 
ever of Lena coming near the office, now that her father 
was not there. On the other hand, it might mean just the 
opposite, that there was a very good chance of her visiting 
the office, just because her father was away. She might 
want something; she might be in trouble; and Mr. Golspie 
might easily have told her to come to the office. And 
now he remembered hearing something , something that Mr. 
Golspie, at the outer door, had shouted to Mr. Dersingham 
sitting in the private office, a something that had to do 
with Lena and ‘you people here,* as Mr. Golspie had called 
them. Turgis knew definitely that Lena was being left 
behind. Well then, she might call at the office any day. 
There was quite a chance, anyhow. So there and then, he 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


254 

decided that for the next twelve days or so, while Mr. 
Golspie was away, he would shave carefully every morning, 
put on his better suit and wear a clean collar, and have his 
hair cut at lunch time on the following day. Having thus 
made up his mind, he felt quite excited, and, as people do, 
if they have drifted for a long time and then suddenly 
come to a decision and adopted a programme, he found 
himself visited obscurely by a conviction that something 
was bound to happen, just as if by drawing a firm straight 
line he could compel circumstance to come and toe it. 

The gas-fire retired from service with a very sad little 
pop. He moved and the bed immediately gave a groan. 
(Everything in the room creaked and groaned and con- 
stantly complained. It was tired of people, that little 
room.) Very carefully he raised the mattress and replaced 
the trousers underneath. Then, with something like an air 
of sheer dandyism, he put out an absolutely clean collar for 
the morning. He went to the little dormer window and 
stared through the few inches of open space at the dark and 
the faint glimmer of the town. Here he was, high up above 
Camden Town, in his own little room. There she was, 
Lena Golspie, perhaps in her little room in Maida Vale, 
perhaps just above those two pillars he had seen, peering 
through the open gate, perhaps looking down on that 
broken statue in the front garden. It made his eyes water, 
staring there like that, but still he remained. His lips 
moved. ‘Listen, Lena,' he began; but then stopped. 
‘Listen, Miss Golspie, Miss Lena Golspie. Listen. Do 
come to the office, do come to the office. And make it 
something I can do. Turgis, you know, the one you saw 
that day. Do come to the office.' 

As soon as he stepped back into the little room, it told 
him, in its various creaky voices, not to be a damned fool. 

‘ Oh ! — you ! * he said to it, aloud, and then made haste to 
undress and get the light out. 

n 

Turgis kept his word to himself. Every day he appeared 
at the office all shaved and brushed and as spruce as it was 
possible for him to be. The others congratulated him and 
chaffed him and invented the most elaborate reasons for the 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 255 

change. Sandycroft, the tall traveller with the small head, 
the inquisitive nose, and the extraordinary number of 
teeth, paid one of his flying visits to headquarters and 
pretended, possibly at the instigation of Mr. Smeeth, not 
to know Turgis. 

‘I say, Smeeth,* Sandycroft barked — and he really did 
bark; it was like having an enormous terrier about the 
place when Sandycroft arrived — ‘ what *s become of that 
other chap — you know, what *s his name — that chap who 
used to wear the dark brown collars ? ' 

'Now who was that, Sandycroft? * said Smeeth, frowning 
and putting his head on one side. Smeeth was as conscien- 
tious and painstaking a wag as he was a cashier. It was 
not often that he joined in a joke, but when he did he was 
almost alarmingly thorough. 

‘You know the chap I mean, Smeeth/ replied Sandy- 
croft, sniffing with that queer little nose of his. ‘Never 
had his hair cut — wore a beard — looked like a Spring Poet 
in the autumn. Sat at the desk over there/ he continued, 
lowering his voice, ‘ where that smart young feller is. Oh, 
what was his name ? * 

Here Stanley gurgled and spluttered, not perhaps because 
he thought this was very brilliant humour, but because he 
thought comic relief in any form should be encouraged. 
Miss Poppy Sellers was giggling a little, too, and Miss 
Matfield smiled at them, not without condescension. 

‘Oh, don't be so funny/ Turgis mumbled, giving Stanley 
a ferocious scowl. 

‘ That *s queer, Smeeth. The same voice — the very 
same voice/ 

‘ I believe you *re right, Sandycroft. I believe you *re 
right/ said Mr. Smeeth, with the air of a dutiful cross-talk 
comedian. ‘ Sure I am/ the other barked. Then he stepped 
forward, with a large polite smile on his face, displaying at 
least a hundred teeth. 'Not Mr. Turgis? Surely it can't 
be Mr. Turgis? * 

‘No/ said Turgis, who was not very good at this sort of 
thing, 'it 's Charlie Chaplin/ 

'Well, Mr. Charlie Chaplin Turgis/ said Sandycroft, 'I 
must congratulate you, I really must. All in favour, 
show in the usual way. Thank you very much, ladies 
and gentlemen/ And he turned away, grinning. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


256 

'Ah, well/ said Mr. Smeeth, settling down to his books 
again, rather as if he had just come to the end of some 
great gusty epic of humour, ' a bit of fun won’t do any of us 
any harm now and again. Here, Stanley, slip round to 
Nickman and Sons with this and say it !s for Mr. Broad- 
hurst — for Mr. Broadhurst, mind. And hurry up, don’t 
take all morning about it. Don’t go shadowing somebody 
all round London/ 

A week had passed, and though news of Mr. Golspie 
himself had trickled through into the general office, Turgis 
had heard nothing about Lena. It seemed as if he was 
making a fool of himself — and being laughed at by the 
others for his pains — and he was beginning to feel very 
disheartened. On two evenings, he had returned to Maida 
Vale and had hung about the neighbourhood of 4a Car- 
rington Villas, but had been rewarded by nothing more 
than a glimpse of a shadow on a curtain. He had been 
tempted then to walk boldly up to 4a and offer some wild 
excuse for trying to see Miss Golspie. But he could think 
of nothing that did not sound insane, and, realizing that 
this crazy step might spoil everything and get him into 
trouble at the office, he dismissed the notion. The other 
evenings went very heavily. He had begun to tell himself 
that he was silly to bother his head about the girl at all, but 
it was one thing to tell himself that and quite another thing 
to stop bothering. 

Stanley returned, and was sent out again. Mr. Smeeth 
departed for the bank. Turgis and the two girls worked 
away quietly ; there was not a lot to do that morning. Then 
Poppy Sellers came over to Turgis with some advice notes 
she had just typed. 

' Are these all right ? 9 she asked. 

He looked them over. ‘Yes, they 're all right. You 've 
got into it now, haven't you ? ' he added, deciding to give 
her a good word for once. She wasn't a bad kid, really. 
'Wish I could type as neat as that. I used to have to do 
it sometimes, before you came, but I used to make a nasty 
mess of it, I did/ 

Her sallow little face brightened at once at such praise. 
But her manner was as perky as ever. ' My words, we are 
coming on, aren't we! What have I done to deserve this? 
But I say/ and here she became more confidential in tone, 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 257 

'you didn't mind what they said — y' know when they were 
trying to pull your leg. I had to laugh, and I thought you 
looked a bit mad.' 

‘If it amuses 'em, I don't care/ replied Turgis loftily. 
‘Bit silly, I call it, all the same. I don’t go round making 
personal remarks about other people. Matter of fact, I 
don't mind what old Smeethy says, 'cos he 's a decent sort, 
and anyhow it isn't often he breaks loose. But I don't like 
that chap Sandycroft. He 's a cocky devil, he is. And, 
anyhow, he 's only just come here — what does he want to 
be trying to be funny for ? ' 

‘That ’s right/ said Poppy, nodding her head. ‘I don’t 
think much of him either. Not my style at all, he isn't. 
Too many teeth, if you ask me. And I don’t like them 
noses that turn up the way his does. If he worked here all 
the time, he ’d have that nose and teeth into everything. 
1 know that sor' * 

'So do I. We 'd a school teacher the very image of him 
when I was a kid, and he used to try it on with us — oh, 
what a hope ! ' 

'Mind you/ Poppy continued, looking at him a little un- 
certainly, 'you do look diffrent — smarter, y' know.' 

'Well, that's nobody else’s business but mine/ Turgis 
declared. 'What 's it got to do with anybody else? ' 

' Oo, all right, don’t jump at me. I only meant — well, you 
look a lot nicer now. In fact, I think you look very nice.' 

Turgis did not know what reply to make to this, so he 
merely grunted. 

‘You don’t mind me saying so, I hope? ' 

'No, 's'ail right,' he replied awkwardly. 

‘I say, listen. Are you going anywhere to-night? ’ She 
stopped for a moment, but then, before he had time to 
answer, went on with a rush. ‘ 'Cos if you aren't — well, 
it's like this, my friend — her father's a policeman — and 
she got two tickets given for the Police Minstrels to-night 
and now she can't go 'cos she 's in bed with the flu and I 've 
got the tickets, and I wondered if you 'd like to come with 
me.' And she drew a deep breath. 

'Well, thanks very much,' he stammered, 'but — I don't 
know — you see ' 

‘Have you fixed up already to go somewhere? 

'Well, I have — really ' 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


258 

‘ Oh, sorry.' Her face fell. She was silent for a moment * 
then looked up — rather cheekily, he thought — and said: 
‘Going out with your girl, p'raps? ' 

This annoyed him, just as if she had jabbed at some sore 
place. ‘Well, that 's my business, isn’t it? ' 

'Oo, sorry, sorry, sorry! Squashed again. I'd better 
shut up.' And she marched away, a compact little figure* 
and began typing with great vigour and noise. Miss Mat- 
field threw a curious glance at her. 

Turgis wondered if he had been foolish to pretend that 
he wasn't free to go to that entertainment. It would be* 
a lot better than doing nothing. He supposed it was too 
late to change his mind, particularly now that she had 
walked off in a huff. He would wish, when the evening did 
come and he had nothing to do but mope about, that he 
had accepted her offer. She really hadn't a bad face when 
you took a good look at it. Yes, perhaps he 'd been silly 
not to accept. 

But when the evening did come and he suddenly re- 
membered how he had refused this other engagement, how 
glad he was! It seemed like fate. And afterwards, when 
he suddenly remembered yet again how he had refused this 
other engagement, how sorry he was! And still it seemed 
like fate. 

He and Miss Matfield came back from lunch at the same 
time that afternoon (Miss Matfield had gone out first, but 
then she always took quarter of an hour longer than any- 
body else), running into one another in Angel Pavement, 
near T. Benenden's. 4 You know, Turgis,' she announced, 
in that clear hard voice of hers which always rather 
frightened him, 4 1 do think you 're beastly rude to little 
Miss Sellers.' 

4 Why, what have I done to her? ' he demanded. 

‘ I saw this morning you 'd hurt her feelings again/ Miss 
Matfield continued. 4 And why you should, I can't imagine. 
She 's quite a nice child, really, underneath that silly perky 
manner of hers, and I think she 's rather lonely, and you 
could be quite good friends. You see, she happens to 
think you ’re rather marvellous.' 

‘And you don't, Miss Matfield,' said Turgis, bold few 
once with her. 'Go on, you might as well put that in 
properly. I could hear it in your tone of voice.' 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 259 

'I certainly don't think you're at all marvellous/ she 
said coolly. 'Why should I? What I do think is that 
you 're being very rude to somebody who is prepared to 
like you a good deal. And when people really like you/ 
she added severely, ‘ you ought to be specially nice to them 
and not rude. Now don’t say anything to her about what 
I 've just said, or I shall be really annoyed/ 

‘All right,' said Turgis sulkily, wondering why he 
couldn't say something sharp to her, for her cool cheek. 
‘But I don't see what I 've done to her. She takes offence 
too quickly, that's it. And whose fault's that? And 
for that matter, who 's ever considered my feelings in the 
office?' 

‘You 're different,' she said airily, 'or if you 're not, you 
ought to be. You 're a man.’ 

Turgis, pleased by this statement that he was a man, 
but still labouring under a grievance, could do nothing but 
mumble and mutter, and Miss Matfield, takipg no further 
notice of him, led the way upstairs. The next time he 
saw Miss Sellers, Turgis looked curiously at her. So she 
thought he was ‘rather marvellous,' did she? He found 
himself returning to this, and to her, several times during 
the afternoon. 

But then something happened, something so important 
that it promptly blew away all thought of Miss Sellers or 
anybody or anything in that office. Mr. Dersingham, who 
had only been there long enough in the morning to go 
through the first post, returned about four to examine 
the later posts, and he had not been in ten minutes before 
he sent for Mr. Smeeth. After a short interval, during 
which one of them telephoned to somebody from the 
pnvate office, Mr. Smeeth came out, looking fussy, as he 
always did when he had something special to do. 

‘Let 's see,' he said, looking round the office, ‘does any- 
body here live Maida Vale way ? ' 

What was this? Turgis's heart jumped and knocked. 

‘Well, I live in Hampstead, and that 's roughly the same 
way,' Miss Matfield began, dubiously. 

‘What is it, Mr. Smeeth?' cried Turgis eagerly. 'I 
know Maida Vale very well.' 

‘Thought you lived Camden Town way?' said Mr. 
Smeeth. 



200 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


'Yes, I do, but — er — I know somebody in Maida Vale, 
often go there. Is it anything I can do, Mr. Smeeth?' 

‘Yes, I think you 'd better have the job, Turgis,' said 
the unconscious Mr. Smeeth, little knowing what effect 
his words were having. ‘You see, Mr. Golspie's got a 
daughter living with him — well, you know that, because 
she came here one day, didn't she? ' 

Oh, my gosh! — didn't she! 

'She hasn't got a bank account,' Mr. Smeeth continued, 
‘ and apparently the girl 's got through all the money her 
father left her — these girls, my word, they think we're 
made of money! — wait till you 're a father, Turgis, and 
then you *11 know — and he *s arranged with us to let her 
have some from his account here. She wants it at once, 
to-day, and we 've just telephoned to see if she '11 be in, 
and she will — trust her! — they'll always be in if they get 
something for it — so somebody had better take it up to 
her, Mr. Dersingham says. I 'd make the young madam 
wait if I 'd anything to do with it,' he went on, madden- 
ingly, ‘because this is only encouraging extravagance, 
upon my word it is — but Mr. Dersingham says she 'd 
better have it now.' 

‘Well, I '11 take it, Mr. Smeeth.’ Oh, wouldn't he just! 

‘All right, then. You 'd better clear off that work 
you 've got on hand, Turgis, and then when you go, you 
needn't come back. If you leave here about five, you 'li 
get there about half-past five, and that '11 leave her ample 
time to put in a full evening spending it. I 've got the 
address here all ready.' 

Got the address! If old Smeethy only knew! Turgis 
could have banged his desk and sent all his advice notes 
and bills of lading and railway and shipping accounts 
flying about the office. He did contrive to clear up a 
few odd jobs, but he did not do as much work as he pre- 
tended to do, for it was impossible to keep his mind crawl- 
ing there, among the papers, and to prevent it from taking 
a wild leap now and then. At a few minutes to five, he 
cleared his desk ruthlessly, so that it looked as if the last 
crumb of work had been gobbled up. ‘I 'm ready now, 
Mr. Smeeth,' he announced. 

‘Right you are,' said Mr. Smeeth. ‘I'm putting twelve 
pounds, twelve pound notes, into this envelope, and it has 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 261 

the name and address on, you see — Miss Golspie, 4a Car- 
rington Villas, Maida Vale. „ I 'll seal that. Now here 's 
a form of receipt I 've made out, and you must get her to 
sign that, so that there 's no possible mistake. You un- 
derstand that?' 

Turgis assured him fervently that he did. He was de- 
lighted at the receipt idea. Once or twice he had thought 
what a dismal ending it would be if he merely handed 
over the money at the door — ‘ Is that the money? Thank 
you. Good afternoon.* But signing a receipt was a dif- 
ferent matter; it could not be done properly at the door; 
you should read a receipt carefully before you sign it ; you 
might want to have it explained; you must ask the mes- 
senger in, and then of course he might have a chance to 
talk. The receipt made it a piece of real business. Good 
old Smeethy! It was just like him to insist on a proper 
receipt. 

‘ And you needn’t come back, of course,* said Mr. Smeeth. 
‘Just pop off home. I *11 just tell Mr. Dersingham I *ve 
fixed it all up.* 

‘What *s all this about? * Miss Matfield asked, as he was 
taking his overcoat from its peg. 

He explained shortly. 

‘Where do they live? * 

‘In Maida Vale. 4a Carrington Villas/ he told her. 

‘I say, listen/ cried Miss Sellers, sweeping away her 
grievance. ‘If you get a chance of going in, go in, and 
then tell us what it *s like to-morrow. I 'd like to know 
what sort of place Mr. Golspie lives in. Wouldn't you. 
Miss Matfield?' 

Miss Matfield, to Turgis's surprise, for he expected her 
to* be disdainful of such idle curiosity, admitted at once 
that she would. ‘ I 'm rather sorry I didn't ask for the 
job/ she added. 'It would be amusing to see what the 
daughter *s like. I have just seen her, but that 's all. 
And I can't imagine what sort of place Mr. Golspie lives in, 
though it *s probably some furnished maisonette they 're 
camping in. Maida Vale *s stiff with them/ 

‘Well, I can't fancy that Mr. Golspie having a 'ome at 
at all/ Miss Sellers put in. ‘Seems a 'omeless sort of man 
to me/ 

'I'll say “Good afternoon/" cried Turgis loudly and 



262 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


cheerfully, and off he went, the money and the receipt form 
snugly tucked away in the ipside pocket of his coat, the 
best coat he had and all brushed and as natty as you like. 
Now for Maida Vale, and no hanging about this time, but 
straight as a shot from a gun through the front gate of 
4 Carrington Villas. He hurried out, running down the 
stairs, in fear of Mr. Dersingham or Mr. Smeeth or Miss 
Golspie or the gods suffering a change of mind at the last 
minute and dragging him back to his desk. 

Ill 

There was just light enough, and time enough, for him 
to notice that the broken statue, really a plaster thing, was 
that of a little boy playing with two large fishes, and that 
the two pillars were peeling badly. There were two bells, 
one for 4, the other for 4a. He was careful to press the 
4a one. He pressed it several times and altogether waited 
nearly five minutes, but nobody came. It looked as if she 
washout, after all. In despair, he tried the bell for 4. 
Instantly, a light was switched on in the hall, and the door 
— there was only one door for both flats — flung open. 

'Is it you here again, young man?' cried an enormous 
woman in an apron, standing there. 'Because if it is, I 've 
to give you the mistress’s word that she 's paying out no 
more money for the machine because the girl that could 
work it has left and it 's no use to us at all the way we are 
now, and not another penny will she pay out for it, so take 
it itself and leave us in peace.’ 

*1 don't know anything about your machine/ Turgis 
told her. 

'Aren't you the same young man? Well, you're the 
very image of him.' 

'I want to see Miss Golspie.' 

‘The young lady above, isn't it? Then ring the other 
bell, with the a on it, and she '11 hear it soon enough/ 

'But I 've been ringing it,' he explained. 'I 've rung it 
about six times.' 

'For the love of God! ' cried the enormous woman, com- 
ing out and looking at the bell-push, as if that might explain 
something. ‘Haven’t they got that bell of theirs ringing 
yet? Every time it 's us, it 's really them. Come inside, 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 263 

young man, come inside, or if we stand here talking another 
minute the mistress 'll be raising Cain the way she 'll say 
she 's destroyed with the draught. Does she know you 're 
coming at all? ' 

'Yes, she does,' replied Turgis, following her into the hall. 
' I 've been sent to see her on business. It 's very im- 
portant. I hope she 's in.' 

'Ah, she 's in, too, because I heard the mistress say she 
was going to see her. At the top of the stairs you '11 see a 
bit of a door — it may be open and it may be shut — and if 
you knock on it, you '11 make her hear. The servant they 
have is out-to-day because I met her here myself this 
afternoon, all dressed up and telling me she 's to meet her 
young man, a sailor in the Royal N avy . Up the stairs then, 
it is, and a hard knock on the door.' 

Just beyond the head of the stairs, there was a door, and 
it was open a little, so that he could plainly hear the sound 
of a gramophone playing jazz. He knocked hard. The 
gramophone stopped abruptly. 

It was Miss Lena herself who came to the door. She 
was dressed in a shimmering greenish-blue* and she was 
prettier than ever. At the sight of her standing there, 
solid and real again at last, his heart bumped and his mouth 
went suddenly dry. 

' I 've come from Twigg and Dersingham's, Miss Golspie,' 
he announced, stammering a little. 

Her face lit up at once. 'Oh, have you brought that 
money? ' she cried, in that same queer fascinating voice he 
remembered so well. ‘ How much is it ? Come in, though. 
This way.’ 

The room was very exciting. It was a big room, but in 
spite of its size, it was full of things. Turgis had never 
seen, except on the pictures, so many cushions; there 
seemed to be dozens of them, huge bright cushions, piled 
up on a big deep sofa sort of thing, stuffed into arm-chairs, 
and even scattered about the floor. And then there were 
gramophone records and books and magazines all over the 
place, and bottles and tins of biscuits and fancy boxes 
heaped together on little tables, and then enough glasses 
and fruit and cigarettes and ash-trays for a whist drive or 
a social; and all in this one rich bewildering room. It was 
lit with two big, crimson and yellow, shaded lamps, and it 



264 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

was very cosy and warm ; almost too warm, even though it 
was a cold afternoon, for an excited young man who had 
hurried there from the bus. 

‘It 's twelve pounds,’ he explained, ‘and I have a receipt 
here that you have to sign.’ 

‘Good! I could do with it, I don’t mind telling you. 
I adore having money, don't you? It 's beastly when you 
suddenly find you haven’t got any, and can’t go anywhere 
or buy anything. Oh, I remember you. You 're the one 
I spoke to that day when I called at the office, aren't you? 
Do you remember me ? ' 

Turgis assured her fervently that he did. He was still 
standing, awkwardly, with his hat in his hand and his 
overcoat hanging loose from his shoulders, and he felt 
rather hot and uncomfortable. 

‘You seem jolly sure about it,' she said lightly. ‘How 
did you remember so well ? ' 

‘You won't be annoyed with me if I tell you, will you, 
Miss Golspie? ' he said humbly. 

She stared at him. ‘Why, what is it? ' 

‘Well, I remember you,' he replied, gasping a little, 
‘ because I thought you were the prettiest girl I 'd ever 
spoken to in all my life.' 

' You didn't, did you ? Are you serious ? ' She shrieked 
with laughter. ‘ What a marvellous thing to say! Is that 
why you brought the money ? ' 

‘Yes, it is,' he said earnestly. 

‘It isn't. You were just sent here. I believe you're 
pulling my leg.' 

‘No, I 'm not, Miss Golspie. The minute I knew some- 
one had to come here,' he continued, with sudden reckless- 
ness, ‘I specially asked to be sent — just to see you again.' 
The hand that was still in his overcoat pocket tried to 
make a sweeping gesture, with the result that his overcoat 
brushed the top of one of the little tables and emptied a 
box of cigarettes on to the floor. 

‘Look what you 've done now,' cried Miss Golspie, greatly 
entertained. 

‘Oh, I 'm sorry,' muttered Turgis, confused and sweating 
now with sheer awkwardness and shyness. * I *11 pick them 

i 

up. 

‘Wait a minute. Take your overcoat off and put your 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 265 

hat down, and then you 'll feel much better. That 's right. 
Dump them down there — anywhere. Now you can pick 
the cigarettes up and you can also give me one of them. 
Take one yourself.* Unsteadily, he lit her cigarette, picked 
up the others, and then lit his own. ‘Now what about 
the money?* she continued. ‘What do I have to do to 
get it?' 

‘Only sign this receipt,* he explained. ‘You ought to 
count it first to see if it *s all right.* 

When they had concluded this little transaction, she 
said suddenly: ‘Have you had any tea? * 

‘No, I haven't,' said Turgis promptly. 

‘Well, I haven't either. I was too lazy to make it. The 
maid 's out to-day. Let 's have some, shall we ? Most of 
it 's ready on a tray, but I just couldn’t bother boiling some 
water and making the tea. You come and help and then 
you shall have some.' He followed her into the little 
kitchen, where he filled a kettle and watched ft come to the 
boil while she chattered in a drifting haze of cigarette smoke 
and languidly produced another cup and saucer and some 
things to eat. Then, when everything was ready, he 
carried the tray into the other room and set it down on a 
low table in front of the fire. Lena reclined, like a lovely 
lazy animal, on a pile of cushions, while Turgis, at the 
other side of the low table, sat in a low, fat arm-chair. 
It was a wonderful tea. The tea itself was good, for there 
were little sandwiches and all kinds of rich creamy choco- 
late cakes and biscuits, all piled up anyhow, like every- 
thing in this careless and sumptuous place. And then, far 
more important than sandwiches and cake there was Lena 
herself, so real, so close, so magically illuminated there in 
the firelight and shaded lamplight. She asked him all 
manner of questions, beginning with ‘ What 's your name ? * 
‘Turgis,' he told her shyly. 

‘What 's your first name? ' 

‘Harold,* he mumbled. It was years since anybody 
(anybody, that is, who didn't merely want him to fill up 
a form) had asked him what his Christian name was. He 
brought it out with desperate embarrassment, but when it 
came out, he felt better. 

‘I don't like Harold much, do you? Mine's Lena.* 
'Yes, I know it is.' 



266 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 

'It seems to me you know everything about me,' she 
cried, laughing. ‘You 'll be telling me next how old I am 
and where I was bom and all the rest of it. Who do you 
think you are — a detective? * 

This was a good opportunity to be bright and entertain- 
ing, so he told her all about Stanley at the office and how 
Stanley wanted to be a detective and went about ‘ shad- 
dering ' people. After which, Lena, who seemed to enjoy 
Stanley, asked him about the other people at the office. 

'You don't like it there, do you? ' she said, wrinkling her 
nose in distaste. ' I 'd die if I had to work every day in a 
place like that. So dark and dismal, isn't it? And they 
call that street Angel Pavement ! What a name for it l I 
nearly passed straight out when my father told me. If 
ever I have to work for my living, I ’d rather work in a shop 
than in an office like that. I wouldn't mind being a manne- 
quin. Or go on the stage. That would be best of all. I 
want to go on the stage. I nearly went on when I was in 
Paris. And a man wanted me to go in for film work — he 
said he *d get me a part right away. Do you think I *d be 
any good for the films? ' 

‘Yes, I'm sure you would,' said Turgis earnestly, all 
solemn adoration. ' You 'd be wonderful on the pictures — 
like Lulu Castellar or one of those stars — only better. I 'd 
go anywhere to see you.' 

If he had thought about it for days, he could not have 
produced a speech more calculated to please her than this, 
because it chimed with her own innermost aspirations and 
beliefs. And his solemn adoration, a change from the usual 
obvious gallantry, was very pleasant. She smiled at him, 
slowly, with a kind of sweet deliberation, and he sat 
looking at her, silent, intoxicated. 

The silence was broken by a sharp rat-tat-tat . 'Oh, 
damn!' cried Lena. 'Who 's that? ' and went out to see. 
She returned, raising her eyebrows comically at Turgis, 
followed by a very strange figure. It was an old woman 
who looked like a dressed up and painted witch. She had 
an enormous nose, hollow cheeks, deeply sunken eyes, but, 
nevertheless, her face had the pink and white colouring of 
youth. This was because it was thickly painted, and when 
it caught the light, it shone, just as if it was enamelled 
and varnished. She was wearing, above a purple dress, a 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 267 

gigantic yellow shawl with a pattern of scarlet flowers on it, 
and she glittered with brooches, necklaces, and rings. 
Never in his life before had Turgis been in the same room 
with anybody as fantastic as this old woman, and suddenly 
he felt frightened. For a second or so, he even forgot about 
Lena, and simply wished he was not there, wished he was 
somewhere familiar, sensible, and safe. It was a queer 
moment, and he remembered it long afterwards. 

Lena introduced him, in an off-hand, slap-dash fashion, 
so that he never caught the name of this extraordinary 
visitor. All he knew was that it was* something foreign ; 
and he guessed that she was the woman who lived down- 
stairs, the mistress mentioned by the fat Irish cook, or 
whatever she was who had admitted him into the house. 

4 No, no, no, my dee-air/ cried the old woman in a 
cracked foreign voice, 1 1 'll not stay at oil, onlee one seengle 
minute. I haf asked my nephew and hees vife and hees 
friend from de Legation to com' to me to-night because I 
am again in vairy great troble. Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes — 
in vairy, vairy great troble again. Dere ees n<i end of eet.' 
At this point she sat down, shot out a clawlike hand and 
took a cake, and promptly gobbled it up. Turgis stared at 
her, fascinated. 

‘What 's the matter? * asked Lena, trying to sound con- 
cerned, but obviously ready to giggle at any monent. 

'Aw!' cried the old woman, repeating this 'Aw' a great 
many times and wagging her head as she did so. *My 
daughtair again, of course — need you ask? Always de 
same — onlee a deef'rent troble.' She swooped down upon 
a cigarette, and popped it in her mouth and lit it with un- 
common dexterity. After blowing a cloud of smoke in 
Lena's direction, she resumed. 'I haf com', my dee-air, 
for two t'ings. First, here are de plomss I said to you I 
would geef you. No, no, no, no. Dey are noding, noding, 
noding at oil. Steel, dey are vairy, vairy nice plomss.' 
Apparently these plums were in the little box she now 
handed to Lena. ‘ Nest, I ask your fadair, Mefestair Colspie 
— does he say ven he com' back 'ere ? ' 

'He didn't say exactly,' said Lena. 'I don't think he 
quite knows yet. But it ought to be some time next week. 
Perhaps you know, do you?' And she looked at Turgis. 

‘That's all I’ve heard, Miss Golspie,' replied Turgis, 



268 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


very conscious of the fact that the old woman was staring 
at him. ‘We expect him back some time next week/ 

‘No, no, no, no. I should like to ask your fadair about 
dees troble for my daughtair— dat ees oil — and eenoff ! Aw 
yes! — eenoff. My nephew's friend from de Legation, he 
may do something. Eef not, I ask your fadair next veek/ 
She threw her cigarette into the fireplace, and got up from 
her chair surprisingly quickly. ‘Aw, my dee-air, dat ees a 
nice, a vairy nice dress you 'ave on now. Aw, yes, eet ees/ 
She ran a beringed claw over some of it. Then she looked 
at Turgis, who immediately wished she wouldn't. ‘Eesn't 
eet a nice dress, eh? You t'eenk so? ' 

The embarrassed Turgis said it was. 

‘She ees vairy pretty, Mees Colspie? Aw, yes — loffly, 
you t'eenk, eh?' 

‘Yes, I think she is,’ replied Turgis, after clearing his 
throat. 

'You are in loff wit* her, eh? ' 

These foreigners! What a question to put to a chap! 
What had it got to do with her, the nosy old hag? He 
made some sort of noise in his throat, and it was enough to 
stop her staring at him and to set her moving towards the 
door, chuckling just as if she was a witch. ‘The young 
man ees afraid of me. He ees in loff. Geef 'im a plom, 
dee-air/ 

When Lena came back, after closing the outer door be- 
hind the old woman, a new feeling, of friendly ease and 
lightness, immediately descended upon them both. They 
were young together. They laughed at the old woman, 
whom Lena imitated with some skill. 

‘She’s our landlady/ she explained. 'Not a bad old 
thing, really — she ’s always giving me things — but quite 
cracked, of course. And the daughter she talks about, the 
one who's in "troble" — she’s some sort of a countess — 
seems to be completely dippy. Everybody who ever comes 
downstairs is a bit mad, and they 're the only people I ’ve 
spoken to these last few days, so you can tell the sort of 
time I 've had. It 's just my damnable luck! — when my 
father 's away and I could do what I liked — three friends, 
all three, take it into their heads to go away, too, this week. 
I could have screamed, I 've been so bored/ She lounged 
over to the window and looked out. 'Looks very thick 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 269 

now. Another fog coming, I suppose. That 's the worst 
of London, all these foul fogs. What shall we do now? 
You haven't to go home or anything, have you? ' 

Turgis, looking his devotion, said at once that he hadn't 
to go home or anywhere. 

‘Let 's go to the movies. We can go to the place near 
here. It 's not bad. Just wait, I shan't be long. Or, 
look here, you could take these tea things back into the 
kitchen.' 

He had taken them all in and had seriously begun to 
think of washing them long before Miss Golspie appeared 
again. What he did, when she did appear, was to wash 
himself in a bathroom that had more towels and bottles 
and jars and tins in it than all the other half-dozen bath- 
rooms he had ever seen put together. And now they were 
ready for the pictures. 

It was not far, but they had to grope their way through 
a mist that was rapidly turning into a thick fog, and once 
or twice Lena put her hand on his arm, and they were cosy 
together in the blank woolly night, and it was all rather 
wonderful. It was better still when they were sitting, close, 
cosier than ever, in the scented and deep rose-shaded dim- 
ness of the balcony in the picture theatre. (Turgis had 
paid for these best seats, and was left with exactly three 
and threepence to take him through the rest of the week.) 
They were both enthusiastic and knowing patrons of the 
films, so that they had a good deal to talk about, and 
frequently as they whispered, her head came close to his and 
her hair even brushed his cheek. It was tremendously 
exciting. The chief picture, a talkie — it was Her Dearest 
Enemy , with Mary Meriden and Hunter York — was good 
stuff, but it was nothing compared to merely sitting in that 
balcony with Lena Golspie, who, incidentally, was much 
prettier than Mary Meriden. She herself thought she was 
just as pretty, but Turgis was sure that she was much 
prettier, and told her so several times. On this occasion 
he abandoned his usual tactics. He did not even try to 
hold her hand. He was content to sit there, to whisper, 
to be so near to this fragrant dim loveliness, with his 
hunger, which he had taken into so many picture theatres, 
momentarily appeased. A dream had come true. He 
reminded himself of this, time after time, if only because 



270 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

the dream, which had been haunting him so long, was still 
more real than this sudden actuality. He longed to make 
everything stand still, knowing only too well that it was all 
flowing away from him. Every photograph that leaped on 
to the screen and then leaped away again was nibbling at 
the evening. Very soon the programme would be corn- 
pleting its circle, and she would be wanting to go, and it 
would be all over. Turgis felt all this, even if he did not 
find phrases to express it, so that he was not completely 
and perfectly happy. He was, as we have seen, a bom 
lover, and a romantic, and what he wanted at heart was 
not ordinary human happiness, but a golden immortality, 
a balcony seat high above Time and Change. 

* You can come back and have some supper, if you like/ 
said Miss Golspie casually, when they descended into the 
gloom of Maida Vale again. ‘ You can help me to make it. 

I 'm hungry, aren't you? * 

He was hungry, and if she didn't mind, he w^ould like to 
help her with supper. He could have shouted for joy at 
the thought that he had not to leave her yet, that the 
evening was being thus magically extended. All the way 
back, they talked about pictures and film actors and 
actresses they liked and disliked, and as there was not 
really much difference in their points of view, for they both 
went to the films in search of an amorous dream life and 
the mere difference of sex only added spice to the discussion, 
they got on very well indeed. After the fog, the room at 
4a seemed richer and cosier than ever, and as Turgis helped 
to put odds and ends of food, mostly out of tins, on the 
little table in front of the fire; he felt as if he had wandered* 
into a glorious film. 

* Can you mix a cocktail ? ' asked Lena. 

‘No/ he replied. Cocktails were not a part of real life 
at all to him, and in a sudden burst of candour, he added: 

' Matter of fact, I've never tasted one in my life/ 

‘Don't be silly/ she screamed at him. ‘You're trying 
to be funny. You must have had/ 

‘I haven't really,' he assured her. ‘I 've had beer and 
whisky and port and sherry and all that, but I Ve never 
had a cocktail.' 

‘All right, my good little boy/ said Lena gaily, 'you 're 
going to have one now— one of the special Golspie Smashers/ 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 271 

He watched her take bottle after bottle from the side- 
board and then shake a tall silver flask, just as he had seen 
people do on the stage and in films. 'Now just you taste 
that, Mr. Angel Pavement/ she commanded, giving him a 
little glass. It had a queer flavour, rather sweet at first, 
then slightly bitter, and ending with a sort of golden glow, 
which seemed to travel all over him. 

‘ Like it ? ' and she put her own glass down. 

'It's fine.' 

* Have another then. We 'll just have one more and then 
we '11 eat.' 

After the second one, he felt larger and more important 
and even happier than he had done before. He insisted 
upon showing her a trick with three pennies. He knew 
three tricks, one with the pennies and the other two with 
cards. The other two could wait ; it would not do to show 
her everything at once. She thought the trick with pennies 
very smart, and they postponed eating until he had shown 
her how to do it and she had practised it several times. 
They were better friends than ever when they sat down to 
eat the sardines and the two salads in the cardboard jars 
and the sliced veal loaf and the fruit salad and chocolate 
cake. Lena ate very quickly and left things and started 
again on them and pushed them aside and altogether dined 
in a delightfully fussy extravagant fashion that was quite 
new to Turgis, who was used to seeing people walk through 
a meal at a good round pace. 

When she had finished eating, Lena lit a cigarette and 
then darted to the large gramophone in the comer. Having 
wound it up, she could not find the record she wanted 
(there seemed to be records all up and down the room), and 
he had to help her, when she had told him half the name 
and tried to whistle a bit of it at him. At last they found 
it, and the gramophone came gloriously to life, filling the 
room with the lilt and throb of this fashionable tune. 

‘Can you dance? ' she asked him, gliding and twirling to 
the music. 

‘ Not much,* he mumbled, ashamed of himself. 

'Well, let's see. Shove that rug back, there. That's 
enough. Now then.' And she came up to him. ‘Not* 
that way. Like this. That 's it. Go on, you can hold 
me tighter than that.' 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


272 

He could, and he did. If they had been standing still, 
it would have been a rapturous moment, but though he 
was delightedly conscious of the body against one arm 
and of the hand that gripped his, he had to try and dance, 
and he was very awkward. 

'You 're ghastly,' she told him, with lips that were not 
four inches from his, ' but you 'll improve. I 've known 
worse. You 've got some idea of the rhythm, and some 
men never even get that. Now — left — right — left — that's 
better. Only you 're so stiff — put some pep into it— oh, 
hell! — the gramophone's stopped. Shove another dance 
record on and we '11 try again.' 

They tried several times, with an interval during which 
they had another cocktail each, and Turgis improved con- 
siderably, and towards the end was holding her as she 
wanted to be held, close to him, and had time to enjoy 
the situation. When they stopped, his arm left her waist 
reluctantly, and she did not seem to resent it. She told 
him all about the dances she had been to in Paris, and then, 
having come to the end of them, suddenly yawned. He 
glanced at the clock. 

'Well,' he said slowly, ‘I suppose I 'd better be going 
now.' 

'All right,' she replied, yawning again. 'I suppose you 
had. I 'm tired all at once — must be this rotten heavy 
weather.' 

'What about all this stuff?' He pointed to the little 
table. 

'Oh, they don't matter. The maid will clear them in 
the morning. She'll be in soon — unless her sailor boy's 
persuaded her to stay out all night. And that would be 
nice for me , wouldn't it? — here all night by myself. No, 
she '11 be in soon. I thought I heard her then.' 

Very slowly, reluctantly, Turgis put on his coat, carefully 
buttoning it and lingering over every button. While he 
did this, he stared at her, wondering how he could possibly 
say what was in his mind. 

She too, had been thoughtful. 'Look here,' she cried at 
last. 'Have you been to the Colladium this week? Well, 
I haven't either, and I want to go, and I hate going by 
myself. If I can get two seats for the first house to-morrow 
night, will you come with me? I might go down and get 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 273 

them to-morrow afternoon if I feel like it. I want to spend 
some of that twelve pounds, anyhow/ 

Would he go ? Oh, my gosh ! 

‘All right then/ she continued, walking towards the door 
with him. ‘Listen. I 'll telephone to you at the office 
some time in the afternoon if it 's all right. I 'll tell you 
where to meet me and all that then/ 

They were standing at the door now, and he was still 
holding her hand, and if he were about to shake it, but was 
at the moment too busy trying to stammer out a few 
adequate phrases. Nor was he merely holding the hand, 
for, involuntarily, he was pulling it too, so that there was 
less and less space between them as his little speech 
floundered on. This made Lena impatient. 

‘I don't know what on earth you ’re trying to say/ she 
told him, ' so don’t bother. And you might as well go now 
before the girl does get back. And I 'll telephone to- 
morrow. Oh, don’t dither so much, silly. There 1’ And 
with that she leaned against him, putting a hand on each 
shoulder, kissed him swiftly on the mouth, drew back, 
laughed, and then shut the door on him. 

Turgis stared at the door, drew a long breath, and then 
wandered down the stairs and through the hall below like 
a man drifting drunkenly out of some Arabian Night. He 
walked up to Kilbum, where he caught a 31 bus that took 
him most of the way home. The fog was not very thick, 
but it was wretchedly cold damp stuff that made every- 
body shiver and cough and wipe their eyes and blow their 
noses and look miserable. But Turgis did not care. As 
he sat gazing at nothing in the bus or marched along the 
blackened pavements, he was warmed by the fire inside 
him and cheered by a host of coloured fancies that were 
rocketing in his mind. 


iv 

When he awoke next morning, he knew at once that he 
was in possession of an exquisite secret and was quite 
different from the Turgis who had rubbed his eyes so often 
in that little room. He was the chap who had been kissed 
by Miss Lena Golspie the night before. He was also the 
chap she was going to telephone to this very day and take 



274 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

to the Colladium this very night. He jumped out of bed 
and then jumped into the part of this new and splendid 
chap. The fact that he still looked like the old Turgis, to 
whom nothing wonderful had ever happened, only made it 
all the more amusing. 

'Another raw morning, my word,* said Mrs. Pelumpton, 
as she handed him his breakfast. 'Them 's best off this 
morning who has to stay in. Edgar 's been gone these two 
hours, and a nasty cold job it must be in that station this 
morning.' 

‘Yes, it must, Mrs. Pelumpton,' said Turgis heartily. 
'I'm sorry for Edgar.' And so he was. Edgar would 
never be kissed by a girl like Lena Golspie, not if he lived 
to be a thousand. Poor dreary devil! 

Old Pelumpton shuffled in, unwashed, blue about the 
nose, and wearing a greasy muffler. Turgis had seen him 
like that many times before, but this morning he resented 
the appearance of this dirty apparition. If Lena Golspie 
knew that he had to eat his breakfast looking at that nasty 
old mess, who might have just crawled out of the dust-bin, 
she would probably never speak to him again. 

'No letter, I shee,' said Mr. Pelumpton, going to the fire 
and warming his hands. ‘That meansh he doeshn't want 
me to go and shee the shtuff thish morning. I '11 go round 
jusht before dinner and catch 'im in then. That 'sh the 
idear.' 

‘Yes, that is the idea,' said his wife sharply, as she 
bustled about. ‘Wait till the pubs is open and then catch 
him in. I know that idea. It 's a good idea, that is. If 
it wasn't for that idea, I don’t know why the pubs 'ud ever 
open at dinner time, 'cos they wouldn’t have any custom.' 

'You hear that,' Mr. Pelumpton said to Turgis, who was 
putting away his breakfast as fast as he could. ‘ Deary me, 
they 've got pubsh on the brain, the women 'ave. If a man 
slitops in a bit, they want to know when he 'sh going to do 
a bit o' work, an' if he goesh out, then it 'sh the pubsh.' 

' And you don't go in the pubs, do you, Mr. Pelumpton? ' 
said Turgis, with a very marked ironical inflection. 

' Oh, no ! He 'ates them, he does,' cried Mrs. Pelumpton. 

* You couldn’t get him to go near one.' 

'What shome o' you people don't realishe,' retorted Mr. 
Pelumpton with dignity, 'ish that the pub may be nesh- 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 275 

eshary in bishnish. And until you 've been in bishnish — a 
bishnish like mine, 1 mean — it'sh shomething you don't 
undershtand. The amount of bishnish transhacted in 
pubsh, my wordsh * 

"Morning, Mrs. Pelumpton,' cried Turgis, wiping his 
mouth and dashing out. What a life the Pelumptons had! 
It seemed incredible that anybody could find so dingy an 
existence worth living. Hurrying down to the Camden 
Town Tube Station, cramming himself into the lift, waiting 
for a City train, swaying near the doors among a mass of 
elbows, newspapers, and parcels all the way to Moorgate, he 
hugged his grand secret. When he arrived at the office, 
he swelled exultantly, for this was where Mr. Golspie gave 
his orders, and they all knew Mr. Golspie and they had 
heard about his daughter, but they did not know what 
Turgis knew. It was a delightful feeling. He wanted to 
laugh out loud every time one of the others spoke to him or 
even looked at him. Ah, little did they knowl 

* You got that receipt all right, did you, Turgis? ' said Mr. 
Smeeth. 

It was extraordinary. He had forgotten all about the 
money and the receipt. But he had the receipt in his 
pocket, nevertheless, and when he handed it over, he 
found himself swelling again inside, nearly bursting with 
secret 1 knowledge and happiness. 

* Did you go inside ? ' said Mr. Smeeth casually. 

‘ Yes,’ replied Turgis. Did he go inside! 

‘ Oo, did you ? ' cried Poppy Sellers, who missed nothing. 
‘Tell us what it was like. What did you say to his 
daughter? Is she nice? Tell us all about it — go on.* 

Not a bad kid, really, though that fringe effect was a 
distinct mess. And she thought him — what was it? — 
rather marvellous. (And so she ought. Why, if Lena 
Golspie — oh, well, I-mean-to-say !) Poor kid — a bit pa- 
thetic, when you came to consider it. And she had wanted 
him to go with her to the Police Minstrels last night! And 
he had half thought of going! Dear, dear, dear! 

‘Well, Miss Sellers, if you really want to know/ he said, 
'I 'll tell you/ 

' My words, aren't we getting grand ! ' cried Poppy. ‘ Go 
on. Very good of your lordship, I 'm sure.' 

‘They live in the top half of a detached house/ said 
K93* 



276 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

Turgis, 'and the room I went into was a large room, bigger 
than this office here, and it had all sorts of things in it, 
and shaded lights and a big gramophone and dozens of 
cushions all over the room ' 

'Did it look like a furnished flat?' asked Miss Matfield. 

*1 suppose so. I don't know. I don't know anything 
about furnished flats.' 

'Well, what about his daughter?' Miss Sellers inquired. 
' What 's she like ? ' 

'I 've seen her — for a minute,' said Miss Matfield. 'She 's 
rather pretty, isn't she? ' 

'Yes, she is,' replied Turgis, keeping a hold on himself. 
He was bubbling inside. 

'Yes, but what 's she like ? ' Miss Sellers persisted, staring 
at him. And when he made no reply, but turned away and 
pretended to be suddenly busy with some work, she gave 
him a curious look before she herself turned away too. He 
never saw it, and if he had seen it, he would not have been 
interested. 

Fortunately, both for him and for Twigg and Dersingham, 
he was not very busy that afternoon. Otherwise he might 
have muddled every consignment of veneers and inlays, 
and so confused the whole trade that it might not have 
recovered for a fortnight. The disadvantage of pinning 
your whole afternoon on a possible telephone call in an office 
is that the telephone is ringing every few minutes and you 
are for ever on the jump. Up to three-thirty, Turgis was 
comparatively calm; from three-thirty to four he was on 
the tiptoe of expectation ; from four to four-fifteen he was 
desperate; from four-fifteen to four-thirty he was swaying 
on the brink of a vast abyss of misery, only to be plucked 
back by every ring of the bell and then hurled forward 
again by each unwelcome voice ('And if you ask me,' said 
the girl at Brown and Gorstein’s, after making one of these 
calls, 'I think it's time Twigg and Dersinghams just 
veneered a few manners on. The way they snap your head 
off!'); and, at four-thirty-five he was sitting staring at a 
desk in Hell, all hope gone, and at four-forty-five he was 
breathing heavily down a telephone receiver in Heaven. 
Yes, she had got the tickets and would he meet her just 
inside the entrance to the Colladium at twenty-five past six. 

Even now, there was no peace for him. The instant he 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 277 

had put down the receiver he had realized that it would 
not be easy for him to be at the Colladium at twenty-five 
past six. Sometimes they did not finish until nearly that 
time, and indeed, on really busy nights, it was often con- 
siderably later. He had to get from Angel Pavement to 
the Colladium, and if possible he had to have some tea. 

'What time do you think we 'll be finishing to-night, Mr. 
Smeeth ?' he inquired, respectfully. 

Mr. Smeeth looked up from his neat little wonderland of 
figures. ‘Oh, I dunno, Turgis. Just after six, I suppose. 
Why, have you got something special on? ' 

'I 've got to be up in the West End at twenty-five past 
six,' said Turgis. (‘And if you knew who I 'm going to 
meet, Smeethy, old man, you 'd have a fit/) Then he 
thought for a moment. * Would you mind if I sent Stanley 
out for some tea for me, Mr. Smeeth ? ' 

' Well, as long as you do it now, before he 'sjbusy copying 
the letters, it 'll be all right/ [ 

So Stanley was dispatched to the Pavement Dining 
Rooms for one pot of tea, one buttered teacake and a bun — 
total eightpence. ‘And do I keep the change?' asked 
Stanley, who had been given a shilling. 

'I should think you don't, my lad!’ cried Turgis, whose 
finances were now in a desperate state. The pictures last 
night had left him with three and threepence; the bus going 
home had cost him twopence ; lunch had been ninepence (it 
cost him nothing travelling to the office, because he had a 
pass on the Underground) ; and now, after paying out this 
eightpence, he would be left with one and eight. On that 
one and eight, he would have to travel to the Colladium 
and get home afterwards, and then exist all the next day, 
Friday. And he had only two cigarettes left. If Lena 
wanted anything in the Colladium — and he could imagine 
her asking for chocolates and cigarettes and ices — he was 
in a hole. 

He got away at five minutes past six, after having a very 
thorough wash-and-brush-up in the little office lavatory, 
hurled himself into the flood of west-bound travellers, and 
arrived, breathless and triumphant, under the red glare 
of the Colladium entrance exactly on time. He had ten 
minutes in which to cool off before Miss Golspie appeared, 
wearing a handsome coat with a huge fur collar and cuffs 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


278 

and looking so rich and beautiful that he was almost too 
shy to talk to her. Their seats were down at the front — 
Turgis had never sat in such seats before — and it would all 
have been perfect it it had not been for two little incidents. 
The first occurred when Lena, during the second turn, a 
silent juggling affair, announced that she would like some 
chocolates. 

‘Can you get hold of that girl there?* she said. ‘She 
always has some nice boxes/ 

Nice boxes! ‘How much are they?* he asked her, 
miserably. 

'Well, you are a mean pig! How much are they? I 
like that, and after I 've paid for the seats, too ! ' 

‘ I 'm sorry/ he stammered, ' but — you see — I 've only got 
one and sixpence/ He had paid tuppence on the bus, 
getting there. 

4 One and six ! ' Lena laughed. It was not an unfriendly 
laugh, but it was not a very sympathetic one either. 4 That's 
worse than I was, before you brought that money, yester- 
day. It doesn't matter, though. I don't know that I do 
want any chocolates. But would you spend your wonder- 
ful one and six if 1 asked you to ? ' 

‘Yes, I would. Of course I would. If I 'd/ he added, 
as the curtains swept down on the smiling jugglers, ‘if I 'd 
hundreds and hundreds of pounds, I 'd spend them all if 
you asked me to. I would, honestly. 

‘Oh, it's easy to say that,' said Lena, not displeased, 
however, at his fervent tone. She gave him a brilliant 
glance, and no doubt remarked that his face was flushed 
and his eyes were at once hot and moist, as if he stared 
through a steam of embarrassed adoration. 

Unfortunately, not all her brilliant glances were reserved 
for him, and that fact formed the basis of the second dis- 
turbing incident. There was a young man, a rather tall 
handsome chap with wavy hair, who was sitting with a 
girl in the row in front of them and a little to their right. 
Turgis had noticed that this fellow was turning round a 
good deal whenever the lights went up and that every time 
lie did so his glance always came to rest finally on Lena. 
After this had happened several times he noticed that she 
was returning this glance. At last, during the interval, 
he caught her smiling, yes, actually smiling, at the chap. 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 279 

Instantly, he felt miserable, then angry, then miserable 
again. 

He could stand it no longer. ‘Do you know that chap 
there? * he asked, trying to appear light and easy. 

‘Which one? What are you talking about? * 

‘Well, you keep smiling at him — I mean, that one there, 
the chap who *s just had a permanent wave, by the look 
of him.’ 

‘Oh, the one who keeps looking round. He seems to 
think he knows me, doesn’t he? He 's rather attractive, 
as a matter of fact/ 

‘Well, I suppose as long as you think so, it *s all right, 
isn’t it ? ’ said Turgis bitterly. He could feel a pain, a real 
pain, as bad as toothache, somewhere inside him. 'He 
doesn’t attract me,’ he mumbled. ‘ If you ask me, he looks 
a rotten twister — bit of a crook or something/ But in his 
heart he knew that the chap was taller and stronger and 
better -looking and better - dressed and altogether more 
important than he was, and he could have killed him for it. 

‘He doesn’t at all,* said Lena. Then she laughed and 
made a face at him. ‘You’re jealous, that's all. And 
you oughtn't to be jealous, it isn't nice. 1 11 smile at him 
again now. I think he 's lovely.* 

When she said that and looked so determinedly in that 
fellow’s direction, Turgis was filled with a desire to take 
hold of her there and then, dig his nails into her soft flesh, 
and hurt her until she screamed. He was suddenly shaken 
with the force of this desire, which was like nothing he had 
known before. But at that moment this little game of 
glancing and smiling came to an end, and the person who 
put a stop to it was the girl with the other man. She 
turned round too — and good luck to her, thought Turgis — 
then frowned and said something to her companion, and 
after that there was no more turning round and Lena 
divided her attention between the stage and Turgis, who 
was left in a queer state of mind and body. 

‘You can come and have some supper again, if you like,* 
said Lena, when it was all over. ‘ The maid wanted to go 
out again, so I said she could, and if you ’d like to come and 
help me again, you can.* 

‘ I should think I would like to,* he cried enthusiastically. 
‘And I *m sorry if I was silly — y' know, in there/ 



280 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

'Jealous boy/ she said, smiling. 'That ’s what you are, 
aren't you? Oh, it 's cold out here, isn't it. Let 's get a 
taxi. Oh, never mind about your precious one and six — 
I ’ll pay. I want to get home quick, out of the cold. Come 
on. Stop that one, there/ 

Turgis had only been in a taxi once before in all his life. 
As he sat close to Lena in the dark leathery interior and 
saw the familiar crowded streets go reeling past the window, 
this effortless journeying seemed magical. They were in 
Maida Vale in no time. It made life seem at once wonder- 
fully rich and simple. When they entered the house, they 
heard a tremendous babble of talk coming from the lower 
flat. It sounded as if that fantastic old foreign woman had 
summoned all her relations and friends and all their friends 
and relations to discuss her 'troble/ In the room above, 
there appeared to be even more cushions, gramophone 
records, boxes, and bottles than there were the day before. 
Once more, Lena mixed some cocktails, and Turgis en- 
countered the queer flavour, sweet at first, then slightly 
bitter, and ending with a sudden glow. Once more, he had 
a second and bigger one, and found everything enlarged, 
including himself. Once more, they sat down to supper at 
the little table in front of the fire, though this time there 
was more luxurious food and it all seemed to come out of 
little cardboard containers. They were very friendly over 
the cocktails and the food, and Lena, dressed in bright 
green, a colour that seemed to throw her red-gold hair and 
light brown eyes, her scarlet mouth and white neck, into 
brilliant relief, was lovelier than ever. It was wonderful. 

‘ Do you know Mrs. Dersingham ? ' she asked him. 

He shook his head. ' She came to the office once, and I 
just saw her, that ' s all.' 

‘She 's not as pretty as I am, is she? Or do you think 
she is? * 

'Pretty as you!' Turgis gave a gasp, and meant it. 
‘Why, there 's no comparison. She 's just ordinary — and 
you 're lovely. Yes, you are, really/ 

‘ You don't mean it. You 're just teasing me.' 

*1 *m not,' he said, solemnly. Teasing her indeed! A 
fat chance he would ever have of teasing her . ' I 've never 
known any girl as pretty as you — never seen one — in all 
my life before — and I never shall, never, never/ 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 281 


She rewarded him with a smile. Then she frowned. 

‘ I don't like Mrs. Dersingham. I met her once. I loathe 
her. She 's a snob and a rotten cat/ 

* Is she ? * Turgis didn't care what Mrs. Dersingham was. 

‘Yes, she is. I hate her. My father doesn't like her 
either. He doesn't like Mr. Dersingham much either. He 
thinks he 's a fool/ 

‘I don't think he's a bad chap though,' said Turgis* 
thoughtfully. ‘ I 've never really had much to do with him. 
But I don't believe he 's much good at business. I know 
the business was in a rotten state just before your father 
came. Good job for us he did come. I don't pretend to 
know much about it, but I do know that. Mr. Golspie's 
clever, isn't lie? ' 

She nodded. ‘ He 's always making a lot of money, but 
he usually spends it all or loses it in some mad scheme. He 
hates staying in one place long, and if it wasn^ for that, he 
could have made a lot more money and been really rich. 
But he doesn't care about that. When he wrote to tell 
me he was coming to London, he said I 'd have to come too, 
because he was going to stay a long time and make a proper 
home for us, but now he 's here, he says he doesn't like 
London, and he 's going away again soon/ 

‘Is he?' Turgis stared at her. ‘What — how do you 
mean “soon"?' 

‘Oh, quite soon,' she replied carelessly. Then she 
remembered something. ‘Look here, I may be wrong, 
though. And you mustn't say anything to anybody, will 
you ? Promise you won ' t .' 

‘All right, I won't. But if he went/ Turgis continued, 
regarding her earnestly, ‘ would you go too? ' 

‘ Oh, that 's it, is it ? ' 

‘Yes, it is. You wouldn't be going, would you? ' 

‘ I might — pass me a cigarette, will you ? — and then again, 
I might not. It all depends. But, look here, if my father 
knew I 'd been saying anything, he 'd be furious, and 
though he usually lets me have my own way, when he 's 
really furious, he 's hellish, I can tell you.' 

‘ I '11 bet he is,' said Turgis, who had never had any doubts 
about that. 'I wouldn't like to see him in a temper.' 

‘What a dreary depressing conversation!' she cried, 
getting up. ‘Let 's have another drink. Have you ever 



282 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


been tight? I expect you have. I got tight once or twice 
in Paris, with some Americans. We were drinking cham- 
pagne and liqueurs all night. I fell on the floor once and 
rolled under a table and went to sleep for hours and hours. 
Shove the gramophone on, with something decent on. Then 
come and have this drink and I '11 see if you can dance yet.' 

They did not dance long, however, for Lena announced 
that she was too tired and that he was too clumsy. She 
turned off one of the two shaded lights and went and stood 
by the fire. He joined her there, standing quite close, 
trembling a little. He put his arm round her tentatively 
and when she did not move away, he tightened it. She 
half turned so that she was lightly pressing against him, and 
then she lifted her glamorous face, looked at him with huge 
mysterious eyes, raised her lips to within an inch or two of 
his, and whispered: ‘Wouldn't you like to kiss me?' 

4 Yes,' and he made a quick movement. 

But she was quicker still, and in a second had broken 
away from him and was laughing. ‘Well, you can't then 
— unless you say you adore me and are madly in love with 
me and that I 'm the most wonderful person you 've ever 
met and that you 'll do anything in the world I ask. Now 
then.' 

'But you are. Oh, you are,' he stammered, all his heart 
trying to break through. ‘ I 've thought that ever since 1 
saw you that day in the office. I 've never thought about 
anything else. I used to come and stand outside this house, 
hoping to see you again, just to look at you.' 

‘You didn't.' There was a faint suggestion of giggling 
in her voice. ‘You didn't.' 

‘Yes, I did. Lots of nights. I did, really. Oh, Lena ' 

‘Oh, funny boy!' she cried, mocking him. ‘Well, you 
can kiss me — if you can catch me.' 

And she dodged behind enormous arm-chairs and round 
the various tables and he went almost blindly after her, 
until at last she darted across to the big deep sofa thing, 
and there sank down among the cushions. ‘No, no,' she 
cried, laughing and breathless, as he came up, ‘you didn't 
catch me.' 

But now he bent over her, clasped her fiercely in his 
arms, and kissed her hard. When he drew back, she began 
laughing and protesting again, but in another minute her 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 283 

arms were about his neck and her body was crushed against 
his and they were kissing again. After a few minutes of 
this, she pushed him away and sat up, but she gave him 
her hand and he knelt there, holding it, with great roaring 
tides sounding in his ears. 

‘And now you've got to behave yourself,' she said, 
strangely calm. 

‘Yes/ he said humbly, looking up at her. If she had 
spoken kindly to him then he would have cried. 

She smiled at him, and then, leaning forward, rubbed his 
cheek gently with her other hand. She brought her face 
nearer his, so that her mouth flamed again in his misty 
sight, but as he raised his head, she retreated, until at last 
he sprang up and clasped her to him as fiercely as before, 
and they were kissing again. For an hour she kept him 
swaying and lunging and beating about in this wild dark 
tide, and sometimes he was only gripping her hand and 
pressing it to his cheek and at other times she was com- 
pletely in his arms for a few moments, answering his drive 
of passion with sudden bright flares of her own. And then, 
strangely calm again, she told him he must go. 

Dazed and aching, he leaned against the back of a chair 
and stared at her with hot pricking eyes. 

She looked at herself in the mirror above the fire-place, 
humming a little dance tune. Then she turned round, met 
his stare with a slight frown, and pointed out again that he 
really must go. 

He wanted to say all manner of wonderful things to her, 
but could not find words for them. He tried to put them 
into the look he gave her. ‘Can I see you to-morrow? ' he 
said, at last. 

‘Mmmm?' She pretended to look very thoughtful. 
‘Well, perhaps. What do you want to do? ' 

‘ I don't mind what it is so long as I 'm with you/ he 
assured her, trying to smile, but finding his face all stiff, so 
stiff that a smile would crack it. ‘What would you like 
to do ? Can't I take you somewhere ? ' 

‘Yes. I 'll tell you what. I 'd like to see that Ronald 
Mawlborough talkie, that new one, you know — where is it ? 
at the Sovereign. Isn't that it — the Sovereign? I believe 
it 's terribly crowded, so you 'd have to book seats.' 

‘I '11 do that if you '11 only come,' said Turgis stoutly. 



284 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

' All right. We 'll go there, then. And you get the seats, 
don't forget.' 

* I shan't forget. What time ? ' 

'Let me see. Oh, I 'll meet you just outside at quarter 
to eight. I believe that 's just before the Ronald Mawl- 
borough picture starts, because I looked it up in the paper, 
this morning.' 

‘ Quarter to eight. All right then. And — I say — 
Lena ' 

But she pointed to his hat and coat, and when he had 
got them on, she took his arm and led him to the door. 
'You can tell me all that to-morrow. But just tell me this. 
Am I nice ? ' 

‘Oh, Lena — you 're the most marvellous girl — oh, I don't 
know what to say ' 

' Don't you, dar-ling ? ' she replied, laughing at him. She 
came very close, held up her mouth, drew it back suddenly, 
laughed again, but finally allowed herself to be kissed. 

Turgis was still dazed, still aching, still hot and pricking 
about the eyes, as he went out into the street and turned to 
have a last look at the enchanted window above ; and desire 
burned and raged in him as it had never done when he had 
vainly searched the long lighted streets fo# an answering 
smile, had stared at red mouths, soft chins, rounded arms 
and legs in tube trains and buses and teashops, had felt 
those exciting little pressures in the darkness of the picture 
theatres, had returned to his little room, tired in body, but 
with a heated imagination, as he had done so many times, 
to see its dim corners conjure themselves tantalizingly into 
the shapes of lovely beckoning girls. The flame of his 
desire was fed from the heart. He was now in love, terribly 
in love. The miracle had happened; the one girl had 
arrived; and with this single magical stroke, life was com- 
pleted. He merely existed no longer; but now he lived, 
and, a lover at last, was at last himself. Love had only to 
be kind to him, and there was nothing he would not do in 
return; he was ready to lie, to beg, to steal, to slave day 
and night, to rise to astounding heights of courage; all 
these trifles, so long as he could still love and be loved. 

The conductor of the 31 bus, noticing the young man 
with the rather large nose, the open mouth and irregular 
teeth, the drooping chin, whose full brown eyes shone as 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 285 

they stared into vacancy, whose face had a queer glowing 
pallor, might easily have concluded that there was a chap 
who was sickening for something. But Turgis was alight 
with love. He sat there in a dream ecstasy of devotion, in 
which remembered kisses glitteied like stars. 


‘Please, Mr. Smeeth,’ he said, next morning, 'could you 
let me have a pound to-day ? ’ 

Mr. Smeeth rubbed his chin irritably. 'Well, you know, 
Turgis, I don’t like doing this,’ he said, fussily. ‘It 's not 

so much the thing itself ’ 

‘It ’s only till to-morrow morning,’ Turgis pointed out, 
for the next day, Saturday, was the fortnightly pay-day. 

‘Yes, I know that, and it ’s a small thing in itself, but 
it 's a bad system. Once you start doing that Sort of thing, 
you don’t know where you ’re going to end. ;When I was 
with the Imperial Trading Company, before theWar, they 'd 
a very easy-going cashier there, an old chap called Hornsea, 
and we used to be paid every month. The result was, 
some of the fellows, particularly one or two of the lively 
sparks, were, subbing all the time and old Hornsea would 
let them have it out of the petty cash. What happened in 
the long run? He got let down, badly let down. Now I 

I don’t mean to say you ’re going to let me down ’ 

‘You know I wouldn’t do that, Mr. Smeeth.’ 

‘Well, you couldn’t, not even if you tried,' said Mr. 
Smeeth with great emphasis. ‘ It wouldn’t work here at all. 
I 'm not old Hornsea. But, believe me, my boy, it ’s a 
bad system. Can’t you last out out until to-morrow morn- 
ing? I could lend you a bob or two myself, for that 
matter.’ 

‘No, thank you, Mr. Smeeth. I’d rather have the 
pound on account, if you don’t mind. It ’s something 
special I have on to-night.' And he added to himself that 
old Smeethy would be just about dumb with surprise if he 
knew too. 

‘Oh, well, in that case, I suppose you ’d better have it. 
But it 's a special case, mind. And don't forget you ’ll 
have a pound less to-morrow morning.' He carefully made 



286 


ANGEL PAVEMENT 


out a slip Sub. H. Turgis — £1 os. od., placed it in the petty 
cashbox, and then handed over the pound note. 

‘Thank you very much, Mr. Smeeth/ said Turgis, quietly, 
humbly. That was the first thing done. The next was to 
book the seats at the Sovereign. He could have telephoned 
and then paid for them in the evening, but this did not occur 
to him, for he did not belong to the seat-booking classes, 
and even if it had occurred to him, he would have rejected 
it as being too precarious. To make certain of getting good 
seats, he curtailed his lunch to a mere gobble and gulp, then 
hurried off to the West End and the Sovereign, which was 
already open. Indeed, for the last hour or so, the Sovereign 
had been doing excellent business, chiefly with young wives 
who had come in from distant suburbs to buy three and a 
half yards of curtain material and, having saved ninepence, 
felt they were entitled to a glimpse of two of Ronald Mawl- 
borough. Early as it was, there were several people in 
front of Turgis at the advance booking office, but he was 
able to get two fairly good seats at four and sixpence each. 
Nine bob for the pictures ! This was easily his record, and 
it certainly seemed a lot of money, nearly as much as he 
earned in a whole day. Nevertheless he paid it gladly. 
With the tickets in his pocket, to say nothing of eleven 
shillings to meet emergencies, he had nothing to do now 
but quietly exist until quarter to eight, and then — Lena. 

It was not worth while going back to his lodgings after he 
had finished at the office, so he went to a teashop not very 
far from the Sovereign and there spun out his meal as 
long as he decently could. Even then, however, it was 
only half-past seven when he arrived at the Sovereign ; but 
he did not mind that, for it would be pleasant just standing 
there, watching the crowd, and knowing that every minute 
brought Lena nearer to him. There was a queue waiting 
for the cheaper seats. Turgis had stood in that queue 
many a time. Now he looked at it with a mingling of pity 
and scorn. It seemed to belong to some ancient and 
desiccated past. In the entrance hall, under the russet 
globes, the footmen and pageboys in chocolate and gold 
were handing the people on to one another and sending 
them, in two jerky dark streams, up the two great marble 
staircases. For the first ten minutes, Turgis merely 
lounged about, but after that, when he knew that Lena 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 287 

might arrive any moment, he carefully planted himself in 
the centre, in sight of all the doors in front, so that there 
was no chance of missing her. Hundreds of girls passed in 
with their young men, but not one of them was as pretty as 
Lena. A few days ago he would have envied a good many 
of those fellows, but now he could afford to pity them. They 
didn't know what a girl was. ‘Wait till you see Lena,' he 
told them, under his breath, as they passed, unconscious, 
smiling. 

At five minutes to eight, he pointed out to himself that 
Lena had been ten minutes late the night before at the 
Colladium. Girls always kept a chap waiting. They were 
famous for it. At eight o’clock he began to be anxious. 
He wondered if he was waiting in the wrong place, and he 
hastily searched the whole breadth of the entrance. At 
quarter past eight, his eyes began to smart. Time, which 
had passed so slowly at first, was now rushing away. The 
Ronald Mawlborough picture had started long ago. A 
lump, compact of sheer misery, rose in his thit>at and then 
wobbled up and down there, trying to choke him. Half a 
dozen times he stepped forward eagerly, only to retire again, 
under the stare of strange girls who thought they were 
about to be accosted, and to pretend to himself that it was 
still worth while staying there a little longer. The last half- 
hour was nothing but a dismal farce, for he knew that she 
could not be coming now, yet somehow his feet refused to 
move more than a yard or two away. It was nine o'clock 
when he finally left the place, with two useless tickets in his 
pocket. One of them he could have used, but he never 
thought for a moment of doing so. It was Lena he wanted 
to see, not Ronald Mawlborough. 

He thought of a hundred excuses for her. She might 
have been taken ill quite suddenly, for girls often were, he 
believed. Something might have happened at the house. 
Her father might have come back unexpectedly. What he 
could not believe was that there was any mistake about 
the meeting itself, for she had suggested both the time and 
the place. Still struggling with his disappointment, he 
hurried along, through the stupid idiotic crowds, and caught 
the first bus that would take him to Maida Vale. More 
excited every minute, he turned at last into Carrington 
Villas, and almost ran to get a sight of 4a. There was no 



288 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

light coining from the sitting-room. She was not there. 
Nevertheless, he came to the conclusion that somebody was 
in, for after waiting a few minutes, he thought he saw a 
light go on in one of the other windows. Once he had made 
up his mind, he did not hesitate at all, but marched straight 
up to the door and rang the bell. He remembered then 
that it was probably out of order. Still, he rang again. 

‘Yes/ said a voice, as the door opened a few inches, 
'what is it? ' 

4 Is Miss Golspie in, please? ' 

The girl, obviously the maid who had been out the two 
previous nights, now opened the door properly and came 
forward to have a look at him. 1 Oo, no, she isn't.' 

'Do you know where she 's gone? ' 

‘Oo, no, I don't.' 

'Oh — I see,' said Turgis miserably. ‘I was hoping to 
see her to-night.' 

'Well,' said the girl confidentially, 'I think she went out 
with a friend, because she got all dressed up just after 
seven and she told me she wouldn't be back till very late, 
and then about half-past seven a young gentleman called 
for her in a motor car. And that 's all I can tell you. 
Would you like to leave a message ? ' 

'No, no message.' He walked slowly down the garden, 
out of the gate, across the road. He had to stop at the 
comer, because he was biting his handkerchief, which he 
had screwed into a ball. Then, when at last he was quiet 
and had put his handkerchief away, he walked on and on 
through a blank misery of a night. 

Mr. Pelumpton was sitting up alone, just finishing his 
last pipe and a mouthful of beer, when Turgis burst into 
the back room. 

'Can you lend me some ink, please? ' he asked. 

'Yersh, I think sho. I got a drop shomewhere. But 
you 're not going to shtart writing lettersh thish time o' 
night, boy, are yer? If I wash like you, clerking all day in 
a norfish, writing lettersh about thish, that, an' the other, 
never shtopping, why deary me ! — you wouldn't catch me 
wanting to write lettersh thish time o' night, my wordsh 
you wouldn't ' 

'Oh, for God's sake,' Turgis screamed at him, 'let me 
have the ink if you 've got any and stop yapping.' 



ARABIAN NIGHTS FOR TURGIS 289 

"Ere, ’ere, ’ere, 'ere, ’ere I Thatsh a way to talk now, 
ishn’t it!’ Mr. Pelumpton, offended and on his dignity, 
produced the ink bottle and put it down on the table and 
then promptly turned his back on it. 'There *sh shuch a 
thing,’ he continued, still with his back turned, ‘ash 
mannersh an’ ashkin’ for a thing in a proper way. And 
you can’t 'ave everything you want the minute you want 
it, not in thish world you can’t, and it ’sh no good you or 
any other man ’ 

But Turgis had banged the door behind him and was 
on his way upstairs. He sat in his little room, a pen in 
his hand, a writing pad on his knee, but at the end of 
half an hour there were only a few stiff sentences down on 
the paper, although a torrent of phrases, angry, reproachful, 
bitter, appealing, had gone raging through Iris head. When, 
in despair, he crumpled the paper and flung down his pen 
and then wandered wretchedly to the window, the night 
out there was filled with tall handsome young men with 
wavy hair and evening clothes, all with Lena in their arms. 
They were laughing at him. She was laughing at him. 
He left the window, and told himself that perhaps she 
wasn’t, though, perhaps she was sorry now. He wished 
he had waited in Carrington Villas until she had returned, 
no matter how late that might have been. He smoothed 
out the writing pad, and tried to decide whether he should 
write something short and forceful or long and appealing. 
Oh, but what was the use of writing! He would see her, 
speak to her, tell her what he thought while looking her 
straight in the eyes. He would show her she wasn’t dealing 
with a kid now, but with a Man. 

He undressed, and, as usual, emptied his pockets. Two 
tickets, four and six each, for the Sovereign Picture Theatre. 
And it was she who had suggested it, and she had never 
even bothered letting him know she wasn’t coming, but had 
just gone out with somebody else, had dressed up, got into 
a car, and laughed at him or forgotten his existence. He 
turned out the light, got into bed, and found himself in a 
hot salty darkness, his eyes filling with tears. 



CHAPTER VIII 

MISS matfield’s new year 

I 

A day or two before Mr. Golspie returned, Miss Matfield, 
sitting with cold feet and a novel she disliked in the 13 bus, 
realized with a shock that it was nearly Christmas. The 
shops she passed every day in the bus along Regent Street 
and Oxford Street had been celebrating Christmas for some 
time; and it was weeks since they had first broken out into 
their annual crimson rash of holly berries, robins, and 
Father Christmases. The shops, followed by the illus- 
trated papers, began it so early, with their full chorus of 
advertising managers and window dressers, shouting 
‘Christmas Is Here,’ at a time when it obviously wasn’t, 
that when it did actually come creeping up, you had for- 
gotten about it. Miss Matfield told herself this, and then 
remembered that every year her mother used to cry, ' What, 
nearly Christmas already ! I never thought it was so near. 
It ’s taken me completely by surprise, this year.’ Yes, 
every year she used to say that, and year after year, Miss 
Matfield would tease her about it. And now, Miss Mat- 
field told herself, she had begun to say it, just as if she was 
on the point of becoming forgetful and absurd and middle- 
aged. Oh — foul! She stared out of the window. Those 
two miles of Xmas Gifts and lavish electric lighting and 
artificial holly leaves and cotton -wool snow were still 
rolling past. The festive season — help! It was an elab- 
orate stunt to persuade everybody to spend money buying 
useless things for everybody else. She tried her novel 
again: The months passed, and still Jeffrey made no sign. 
He had not forgiven her. In despair, Jenifer accepted an 
invitation to join the Mainwarings in Madeira, returned to a 
gay but feverish fortnight in Chelsea { where John Anderson 
sought her out everywhere and never left her side), and then 
appeared, still smiling, still audacious, but with a vaguely 

290 



MISS MATFIELD’S NEW YEAR 291 

haunted look , at Cap d* Antibes. It was there she heard that 
Jeffrey had been seen at Miami — ‘And with Gloria Judge , 
my dear .* And that was quite enough of that. Who 
cared what happened to Jenifer and Jeffrey, the pair of 
ninnies? And why were all these novels always filled 
with people who spent all their time travelling about to 
mere resorts and spas, and deciding whom to live with 
next? Nobody ever did any work in them. 

She returned to the subject of Christmas. It was, on 
the whole, she decided, revolting. You gave people a lot 
of silly things, diaries and calendars and rot, or useful 
things that were not right, gloves of the wrong size and 
stockings of the wrong shade (and she would have to be 
thinking out her presents now, and she was terribly hard 
up) ; and they in their turn gave you silly things and the 
useful things that were not right. You ate masses of food 
you didn’t want (and even Dr. Matfield, who had ideas 
about diet, said it didn’t matter at Christmas), and then 
you sat about, pretending to be jolly, but really stodged, 
sleepy, headachy, and in urgent need of bicarbonate of 
soda. If you stayed at home, you yawned, tried to con- 
vince your mother that you hadn’t a rich secret life you 
were hiding from her, and drearily sampled the family 
supply of literature. If you went out, you had to pretend 
you were having a marvellous time because you were wear- 
ing hats from crackers and playing pencil and paper games 
(‘Let me see, a river beginning with “V”?’). And what 
was so terribly depressing and revolting about it all was 
that it was possible to imagine a really good Christmas, 
the adult equivalent of the enchanting Christmases of 
childhood, the sort of Christmas that people always thought 
they were going to have and never did have. As the bus 
stopped by the dark desolation of Lord’s cricket ground, 
swallowed two women who were all parcels, comic hats, 
and fuss (a sure sign this that Christmas was near, for you 
never saw these parcels-and-comic-hat women any other 
time), and then rolled on, Miss Matfield took out from its 
secret recess that dream of a Christmas. She was in an 
old house in the country somewhere, with firelight and 
candlelight reflected in the polished wood surfaces; by her 
side, adoring her, was a vague figure, a husband, tall, strong, 
not handsome perhaps but distinguished; two or three 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


292 

children, vague too, nothing but laughter and a gleam of 
curls; friends arriving, delightful people — 'Hello,* they 
cried. ' What a marvellous place you *ve got here I I 
say , Lilian!*; some smiling servants; logs on the fires, 
snow falling outside, old silver shining on the mahogany 
dining table, and 'Darling, you look wonderful in that 
thing,* said the masculine shadow in his deep thrilling 
voice. 'Oh, you fool , stop it,* Miss Matfield cried to her- 
self. She had only brought out that nonsensical stuff to 
annoy herself. She liked reminding herself how silly she 
could be. It braced her. 

She would go home, as usual, for Christmas, and on the 
way there she would look forward to it and imagine that 
this time it was going to be rather nice, and once she was 
there, she would wonder how she could have thought it 
would be anything but depressing. All as usual. Still, 
it would be a change, a break in what had lately been the 
very dull round of the office and the Burpenfield. Never 
had the round been duller. The Burpenfield was getting 
worse; Evelyn Ansdell — lucky child! — had gone off with 
her absurd father; and nobody amusing had arrived. She 
had not met a single interesting new person for ages. 
Then, life in Angel Pavement had merely been so much 
typewriter-pounding since the one amusing person there, 
Mr. Golspie, had been away. Mr. Golspie, she admitted 
to herself, with unusual candour, was amusing, easily the 
most amusing person on the horizon — bless him! — and 
she would be glad when he came back. It would be fun, 
if only one had the cheek and courage to do it, to bring 
Mr. Golspie into the Club, to introduce him to Tatters, to 
say, ‘Miss Tattersby, this is the only amusing man I know 
just now.* But — oh Lord! — she must keep off Tatters. 
In the Club, they talked about Tatters day and night. 

She had further proof of this, if she had wanted H, when 
she reached the Club, for on the landing outside her room 
she met the depressing Miss Kersey. ' Is that you, Mat- 
field?* Kersey wailed, all damp and droopy as usual. 
'Don't, don’t go near Tatters to-night, whatever you do. 
I went in to ask her about sub-letting my room and she 
simply snapped my head off, didn’t give me an earthly 
chance to tell her when I wanted to sub-let or anything. 
She just flew at me, Matfield, as if I 'd been caught stealing 



MISS MATFIELD’S NEW YEAR 293 

or something. Isn't Tatters really awful ? And yet the 
last time I went in, she was as nice as anything and even 
asked me about my sister, the one who 's gone to Burma. 
I won't go near her now for months/ she added, really en- 
joying the fact that Miss Tattersby could be so ferocious, 
so unpredictable in manner. 1 1 'll send her notes as some 
of the others always do. Don't you go near her to-night.' 

Miss Matfield said she had no intention of doing so, and 
then hurried into her room, where she came to the conclu- 
sion, as she tidied herself for dinner, that it was really 
Tatters who made the Burpenfield endurable for people 
like Kersey, for she gave their lives a colouring of danger 
and drama, poor old things. At dinner, she had to share 
a table with Isabel Cadnam, the languid Morrison, and a 
recent arrival who had taken Evelyn Ansdell's old room, 
and annoyed Miss Matfield just because she M^s not Eve- 
lyn Ansdell. But, apart from that, this new girl was an 
irritating creature. Her name was Snaresbrook; she had 
untidy dark hair, huge staring eyes (heavily made up), 
and white, flabby, sagging cheeks; and she was soulful, 
gushing, and psychic. So far she had been a great success 
because she went round talking to people about themselves 
very sympathetically, offering to tell their fortunes, and 
going in tremendously for this heart-to-heart business. 
Miss Matfield, a tougher subject than most, refused to be 
taken in. When she sat down the other three were already 
there, and were talking about work. 

‘I '11 bet you '11 agree, Mattie,' said Miss Cadnam. 

'What 's that? ' inquired Miss Matfield. 

‘I was just saying that it 's part of the cussedness of 
everything that nearly every girl here has the wrong job. 
I mean, if you like one kind of thing, then it 's ten to one 
you have to work in a place where it 's all another kind of 
thing. I 've just discovered that Snaresbrook here works 

for a film renting show, and she loathes it ' 

'I wouldn't say that,’ Miss Snaresbrook put in softly in 
her soulful contralto, ‘ because I don't loathe anybody. I 

don't think one ought to ' 

'I do, said Miss Morrison. ‘I loathe nearly everybody. 
I think the world 's full of people who are absolutely foul.' 

'No, I don't loathe these film people. But I do feel 
they 're not my own kind. I don't feel really sympathetic 



294 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

towards them, and I feel there is work of a better kind 
waiting for me.' And Miss Snaresbrook turned her huge 
staring eyes, like the headlights of a car, round the table. 

‘That's just what I'm saying/ cried the excitable 
Caddie. ‘Now I 'd adore to work at a film place; just my 
style. And here I am, assistant secretary to the League 
of the Divine Lotus, and I *m sure you 'd adore that, 
wouldn't you, Snaresbrook? Whereas, if you don't mind 
my saying so, I think these Divine Lotus people are all too 
sloppy to live, and the minute they begin to talk now, they 
get on my nerves. If I stay there much longer, I '11 go 
potty too and break out into robes and mystic stars and 
Wisdom from the East. If anybody mentions the East 
now, I want to scream. A lot of fat film men smoking 
cigars would be a marvellous change. And to go to trade 
shows if you want to — marvellous!' 

‘You two ought to swop jobs/ said Miss Matfield. ‘Then 
you 'd both be satisfied. What about that, Caddie? ' 

‘ That *s just where the cussedness comes in. They 'd 
never have the right ones. It 's the same with nearly 
everybody here. If you Ye heavily West End, you Ye 
landed with a job at a wholesale milliner's somewhere in 
the City ' 

'Revolting! ' murmured Miss Morrison. 

* And if you Ye a wild Socialist or something, like that 
Colenberg girl, you find yourself secretary to Lady Thom- 
son-Greggs in Berkeley Square and grumble like anything 
because the place is stiff with footmen. I told Ivor about 
that, the other night, and he said I ought to write an 
article about it for the papers.* 

‘Why don't you?' said Miss Snaresbrook. ‘I'm sure 
you could write. You have the gift of expression. I don't 
think I 've looked at your hand yet, have I ? I'm sure it 's 
written in your hand.' 

Miss Matfield looked across the table in time to catch a 
disgusted glance from Morrison, whose grey eyes had also 
the gift of expression and announced quite clearly that 
Snaresbrook was revolting. ‘Well, I don't think much of 
my job/ said Miss Matfield, ‘but I don't know that I 
particularly want anybody else’s here. The fact is, they 're 
all pretty rotten, and that 's the real trouble. We don't 
any of us get a chance to do anything really important. 



MISS MATFIELD'S NEW YEAR 295 

They 're all silly little mechanical jobs. If we were men, 
we 'd be doing something decent now. What chance has a 
girl? The rot they talk about women working! The men 
jolly well see where all the decent jobs go to. And you 
know it.' 

‘True, Miss Matfield,' said Miss Snaresbrook, turning on 
all the sympathetic stops. ‘I feel it 's particularly unjust 
in your case. A girl with a strong character like you is 
entitled to an important, responsible post. We have a 
long way to go yet. Men are still trying to hold women 
back, to keep them in inferior places. And their attitude! 
The things some of those film men have said to me! ' She 
sighed, then switched on the headlights. 

‘Yes, I '11 bet they 're a tough crowd,' said Caddie cheer- 
fully, ‘but that ought to make it amusing. Men are easy 
enough to handle. It 's women who are so awful. There 
are some frightful old cats among those Lotus creatures. 
They come swarming and drooping all over you, and all the 
time they 're poking their long noses into yotir affairs and 
making up the most fiendish lies. Give me tfien. I wish 
there were some in this club.' 

‘Miss Cadnam, you don’t really,' said Miss Snaresbrook 
reproachfully. 

‘Yes, she does, and so do I,' said Miss Morrison, roused 
for once from her languid disgust, ‘and so will you when 
you 've been here as long as we have. I 'm not so terribly 
keen on men — most of them are pretty foul, so far as I can 
see — but a few here would be a pleasant change. The ones 
we do get as visitors are usually fairly hopeless, but even 
then I like to see them down here, trying to pretend they 
don't mind the foul food. There are too many girls here. 
Ugh! Too much feminine slush and slop. Too much 
powder and lipstick and cold cream. Too many stockings 
and silk jumpers. Too many hot-water bottles and bed- 
room slippers. Too much messiness and brightness and 
depressingness and sympathy. Every time I hear some 
man clumping about here, and see him sit down, all solid 
and thick, I 'm delighted — I don't care how terrible he is. 
Too many women about. Revolting!' 

‘Whoops! ' cried Caddie. ‘Go on, my dear. Don't stop 
now.' 

‘Talk about girls living their own independent lives!' 



29 e> ANGEL PAVEMENT 

Miss Morrison continued, pink and defiant. ' It 's a marvel 
to me that after living here a year or two and being faced 
with the prospect of living here for donkey's years like some 
of the poor old things ' 

'Oh, don't T Miss Matfield groaned. 

'I say that it 's a marvel to me we don't just marry any- 
body, anybody at all, or, failing that, run away with some- 
body. A place like this simply encourages wild matrimony 
and risky adventures. And if there isn't more of it, I '11 
tell you why. It 's not just because we *re all such ni-ice, 
ni-ice girls, so ni-icely brought up, but because there aren't 
many chances going about.' 

'Oh, aren't there, Morrison?' said Caddie. 'Speak for 
yourself.' 

' I 'm not speaking for myself or for anybody in par- 
ticular ' 

'You're certainly not speaking for me, Miss Morrison,' 
said Miss Snaresbrook, with a large, sweet, forgiving smile. 
‘I like the society of men, but I like the society of other 
girls too. Whoever they are, I find they interest me, and 
we have something to say to one another, very often some 
little secret to share, some confession to make. Of course, 
I admit those little clairvoyant gifts of mine have helped 
me a great deal, and have brought me friends, dear friends, 
among girls who probably imagined at first that they and I 
hadn't much in common. And I 'm sure I intend to enjoy 
my-self at the Burpenfield.' And, smiling sympathetically 
at them all, she rose and left the table. 

' And I hope it keeps fine for you,' muttered Miss Morrison 
to her retreating back. 'You know, of the many ghastly 
specimens who have turned up here this year, I think that 
one the worst.' 

' Oh, I don't know,' said Miss Cadnam. ' She 's not so 
bad, really ' 

' That 's because she 's going to read Caddie's palm to 
find her gift of expression,' Miss Matfield explained. 

'Of course it is,' said Miss Morrison. 'You're feeble, 
Caddie. I saw you swallowing the bait, as if you 'd just 
been bom. Vile!' 

'Have you people realized that it 's nearly Christmas?' 
said Miss Matfield, as they moved upstairs, where they 
could smoke. 



MISS MATFIELD'S NEW YEAR 297 

‘My dear Mattie/ cried Miss Cadnam, ‘you don't mean 
to say you 've only just found that out! I 've bought all 
my presents and sent half of them off. If I don't send some 
of my people very early presents, they never remember to 
send me anything.' 

‘Christmas, yes/ said Miss Morrison, with languid dis- 
taste. ‘Isn't it foul? I haven't bought a thing yet, 
haven't even made out a list. Anyhow, I haven’t any 
money. I loathe Christmas, even though one does have a 
holiday. What good is it? Are you going home, Mat- 
field?' 

‘Yes. I always do.' 

'So am I. It 's pretty ghastly. It wasn't so bad before 
my brother went out to the Sudan. We used to have 
rather an amusing time.' 

‘But you 've another brother, haven't you, Morrison? 
I thought I saw him here once.' 

‘Yes, Anthony. He's at Cambridge, researching. By 
the way,' Miss Morrison continued, ‘he wants to come 
along early next week and bring his researching friend Jiggs 
or Hoggs or something and take me and any lady friend o' 
mine out for what passes for a gay evening up in the Cam- 
bridge research labs. If either of you is djung to come, 
you can, but I don't advise it. I 'm trying to get out of it/ 

‘I thought you were bursting to go round with a few 
men, Morrison.' 

‘No, it 's not as bad as all that. I 've tried this before. 
Anthony, my brother, is pretty glurK and dumb — quite 
different from Tom, the Sudan one — and his researching 
friend, Higgs or Joggs, is the limit. He 's frightfully tall 
and awkward, with very short hair, a very long nose, and 
spectacles, and when you try to make conversation with 
him, he thinks you 're asking scientific questions. If he 
doesn't know exactly, he just says “I don't know"; but if 
he does know, he explains all about it, gives you a short 
lecture, and then completely shuts up. It 's like being 
back at school, only worse. He 's a horror. Anthony, of 
course, adores him, and thinks he 's conferring an immense 
favour on you by bringing this monster. He said to me, 
" One day you 'll be proud to think you 've talked to Jiggs" 
—or Hoggs. And so I told him I wasn't ambitious and 
I *d risk having missed the great Higgs. No, on second 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


298 

thoughts, you can't come. I 'm definitely going to put 
him off. Talking about Joggs has brought it all back too 
clearly.* 

'Hello,* cried Miss Cadnam, looking at her watch. ‘I 
must fly.* 

'Ivor?' 

' Ivor — thank God ! We 're supposed to be in the middle 
of another row, but I know he *11 be there/ 

' What a ridiculous pair ! * said Miss Matfield, smiling, as 
she watched Caddie leave the lounge. 

'Who? Caddie and her Ivor? Oh, quite mad of course, 
from what I *ve heard about them. Still/ said Miss 
Morrison carefully, 'it does pass the time for her, doesn't 
it? ' 

' Oh, it does a lot more than that. Caddie lives a wonder- 
fully dramatic life. She probably would, anyhow, if there 
wasn't Ivor to quarrel with and then make it up with. She 
and Evelyn Ansdell were the only two people here I *ve 
over envied, because they both contrived to have an 
exciting life all the time, even if they were absurd. I think 
I shall have to find a nice little Ivor.' And Miss Matfield 
gave a short laugh. 

'You don't lead a double life or anything of that kind, do 
you, Matfield? ' Miss Morrison inquired, almost wistfully. 

' Heavens, no ! What do you mean ? * 

‘ Let *s have another cigarette, shall we ? Make a night 
of it. I only meant — well, it *s a compliment really ' 

‘ It doesn't sound like one. ’ 

'Well, I meant that you looked as if you had a more 
interesting sort of life going on somewhere . You go down 
to your office in the City — it is in the City, isn t it ?— yes, I 
remember your telling me it was — and you come back 
here and don't seem to do anything much, but at the same 
time you look quite alive, as if something 's happening 
somewhere/ 

' It isn't.* Miss Matfield laughed, then lit her cigarette. 
4 1 wish it was. All perfectly dull, respectable, ordinary. 
A typical Burpenfield existence.* 

‘Oh, foul! Well, I 'm disappointed in you, I really am, 
Matfield. I 've been suspecting some time that you were a 
dark horse. Tell me, what sort of men are there in that 
office of yours. Did I ever tell you I was in the City once? 



MISS MATFIELD'S NEW YEAR 299 

I nearly died. I don't believe it was a typical City place 
at all, though I was only there a week. There were four 
men there, two young ones with adenoids and whiny voices, 
who always called me “ Miss," and two older ones with red 
faces and waxed moustaches, who either shouted at me at 
the top of their voices or came over slimy and breathed 
down my neck and put their hot hands on my shoulder. 
Revolting! Don't tell me they're all like that. What 
are your lot like?* 

They were in a quiet comer of the lounge, which was not 
so full as usual, indeed almost empty, and Miss Matfield 
found herself drifting into a fairly detailed description of 
the people in Angel Pavement, concluding at some length 
with the newest arrival there, Mr. Golspie. She ended with 
an account of her visit to the Lemmala, the foreign sailors, 
the cabin, the vodka, all the strange romantic accessories. 
She described it well, and Miss Morrison, who appeared to 
have dropped her usual attitude of languid disdain towards 
this life, listened eagerly. 

'But, my dear Matfield,’ she cried when it Was done, ‘I 
think that was a most amusing adventure. I like the 
sound of that man, even if he is middle-aged and what not. 
Now, if I met people like that when I went to work, I 
wouldn’t grumble. No such luck, not in Anglo-Catholic 
and ladies’ bridge circles in Bayswater — nothing but old 
tabbies. I think I shall have to try the City again, after 
all. I didn’t know there were such entertaining, mys- 
terious, brigandish' sort of men down there.' 

’That 's exactly what Mr. Golspie is — brigandish.’ 

'Quite right, too. I ’m all for it. You ought to lure 
him in here, so that I can meet him. But tell him to shave 
off that large moustache first/ 

’Why should I? It doesn't matter to me. I'm not 
going to kiss him/ Miss Matfield added quickly, without 
thinking what she was saying. 

'No, I suppose you ’re not/ said Miss Morrison medita- 
tively. ‘ By the way, has he suggested you should ? ' 

'No, of course not. Don't be ridiculous. I believe 
you 're suffering from a complex, Morrison. Why should 
he?' 

‘Oh, I don't know. He sounds vaguely like it to me. 
I don't mean he sounded like those awful creatures with 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


300 

waxed moustaches that I worked for — not a bit. Quite a 
different type. But still — however, I 'll say no more. 
Did you say he was away, this mystery man? When is he 
coming back? Quite soon ? All right, Matfield, you must 
tell me more about this, you really must. I 'm interested 
for once in my young but embittered life. You must tell 
me more.' 

‘There won't be anything to tell/ said Miss Matfield 
casually. * I think I ’ll write home, think about Christmas 
presents, have a bath, and go to bed early. Good night, 
Morrison/ No, of course, there wouldn't be anything to 
tell. And if there was, it was no business of Morrison's. 
(But Morrison was not a bad sort, much better than she 
used to appear to be.) But then, there wouldn't be. 
Absurd. 


‘Just read that over, please, Miss Matfield,’ said Mr. 
Dersingham, and then listened self-consciously. ‘Does 
that sound all right to you ? ’ he inquired, when she had 
done. ‘I want to send them — y' know — a jolly stiff letter. 
They 've asked for it, by George! ' 

'I think it sounds rather feeble,' replied Miss Matfield. 
She had no respect for Mr. Dersingham; he was too vague, 
pink, and flabby; he was like too many men she had met 
at home, the sort who cry ‘Shooting!' when somebody 
makes a good stroke at tennis; he did hot really exist, in 
her eyes, as an individual at all; there were hundreds, 
thousands of him. She knew that though he might be her 
employer, he was really frightened of her. Impossible for 
her to have any respect for him. Quite a decent fellow, of 
course, but then the place is stiff with dull, decent fellows; 
a few fascinating crooks would be a change. 

'Oh, I don't know about that, Miss Matfield/ he said. 
‘Seems to me to touch 'em up a bit. What 's wrong with 
it exactly? ' 

‘I should change it — there' — she pointed — ‘and there, 
don't you think so ? ' What was it like being Mrs. Dersing- 
ham, she wondered, and came to the conclusion that it must 
be rather fussing half the day, boring the other half, but 
on the whole pleasanter than being Lilian Matfield at the 



MISS MATFIELD’S NEW YEAR 301 

Burpenfield. But that was leaving out Dersingham him- 
self. She couldn't marry him. Help! She stared at his 
nose, which was quite a healthy, sound nose, slightly bul- 
bous, a shiny pink deepening to a fishy red at the blunted 
tip; there was really nothing wrong with it; nevertheless, it 
annoyed her; it was a silly nose. What was Mrs. Dersing- 
ham's real opinion now of that nose? Did she think it was 
marvellous? Was she indifferent to it? Had she been 
irritated by it so long that she was ready to scream at the 
very thought of that nose ? 

Happily unconscious of what was buzzing about in the 
dark head so close to his, Mr. Dersingham frowned down 
upon the letter he was answering, an evasive, slinking, 
slimy letter from the mysterious fellow who ran the 
Alexander Imperial Furnishing Company. ‘He 's a dirty 
dog, y' know, Miss Matfield,' he mused. ‘ This i$ the fourth 
letter he 's sent explaining why he can't pay,, and every 
time it 's a different excuse. By the way, remind me to 
send Sandycroft a note, telling mm not to cftlt there any 
more. All right, I 'll write something shorter a&d stronger. 
'‘Unless our account is settled within the nefct fourteen 
days, we shall be obliged to take — what is it? — pro- 
ceedings." Something like that, eh? Right you are, then. 
Cancel that one. We ’ll start again.' 

That did not take long. The note to Sandycroft could 
be left to Miss Matfield. She was given several letters that 
Mr. Smeeth could attend to, and then there was nothing 
left. ‘I 'm expecting Mr. Golspie back this morning,' said 
Mr. Dersingham. ‘ He '11 probably have some letters for 
you. He rang me up last night, at home, just to say he 'd 
just arrived and would be down this morning. Just take 
this lot, will you? Half a minute, though, I must have 
another look at that North-Western and Trades Furnishing 
letter. Hang on a minute.' 

Miss Matfield, hanging on, found she was quite excited 
by the prospect of seeing Mr. Golspie again so soon, though 
they had been expecting him to return any time these last 
few days. It was not quite three weeks since she had 
stood by his side on the deck of that steamer in the Thames, 
but, nevertheless, Mr. Golspie strictly as a person, a face, 
a body, a voice, had become curiously dim and unreal, 
though as a figure in outline and as a mass of character he 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


302 

had been constantly in her thoughts, where he had ap- 
peared, especially during the last few days, hardly as a real 
^person she knew, but rather as a particularly vivid and 
memorable character in a play she had seen or a novel she 
had recently read. It was queer and exciting to think that 
he would actually walk into the office at any moment. 

‘I think I 'd better have a talk to Mr. Smeeth about that 
letter,' said Mr. Dersingham, putting it on one side. 'You 

might tell him, Miss Matfield ' But now two doors 

were flung open and banged to in rapid succession. Mr. 
Golspie had arrived. 

'Hello, Dersingham,' he boomed, clapping and rubbing 
his hands. * Hello, Miss Matfield. Brrrrr — but it 's devilish 
cold here. I can feel it creeping up and down my bones. 
Funny thing, but it 's colder here than it ever is in places 
that pretend to be really cold, twenty below and all the 
rest of it. Damp, I suppose. Ten years of this would do 
me in. Well, how's everything? Making money?' 

'All right, Miss Matfield,' said Mr. Dersingham. 

Miss Matfield could not decide whether she had exag- 
gerated the size of Mr. Golspie's moustache or whether he 
had had it trimmed. The fact remained that it seemed 
considerably smaller. Another fact remained, and that 
was that she felt disappointed. She walked out of the 
room feeling absurdly disappointed. It was quite un- 
reasonable, but there it was. 

This feeling persisted throughout the day. Mr. Golspie 
came into the general office and shouted genial greetings 
at everybody. Afterwards, when Mr. Dersingham had 
gone, he dictated a few letters to her, but he said little or 
nothing, and neither that day nor any of the days before 
Christmas did he once refer to her visit to the Lemmala. 
There was no particular reason why he should, but still it 
was disappointing, and he was disappointing, and every- 
thing was disappointing. 

Those last few days before Christmas were so awful that 
she found herself looking forward more and more eagerly 
to the holiday at home, to that train which would take her 
away, on Christmas Eve, from the vast glittering muddle 
of London. Mr. Golspie, who was apparently going to 
spend Christmas in Paris with his daughter, and Mr. Der- 
singham, whose spirits rose at the approach of all holidays. 



MISS MATFIELD'S NEW YEAR 303 

were in a good temper, but everybody else in the office 
seemed unusually gloomy. Mr. Smeeth was not exactly 
gloomy, but he was worried and fussy, as if something was 
troubling his grey and shrinking little mind. Turgis, who" 
was not cheerful at any time, was simply terrible ; he went 
slouching about the place, sat at his desk staring out of the 
window at the black roofs, made a mess of his work, and 
almost snarled his replies to any civil question. Several 
times she had to speak to him quite sharply, the lout. The 
little Sellers girl, perhaps because Turgis was either so aloof 
or so rude, was not her usual perky self, and even Stanley, 
though ready to give Christmas or any other holiday the 
warmest welcome, had suffered so much lately from the 
moods of Mr. Smeeth and Turgis, who accused him un- 
justly of dawdling over every errand, that he was now 
turning into quite a sulky boy. And although Miss Mat- 
field, who 'considered herself merely a visitor to Angel 
Pavement, in it but not of it, had always preserved her 
independence, she had to sit in the same room all day with 
these others, to work with them, and could not help being 
influenced by the prevailing outlook and their various 
attitudes. It was depressing. 

Outside the office it was as bad, if not worse. She had 
her presents to buy, which meant frantic rushes to the 
shops during lunch time or the short space left to her in 
the evening before they closed. They were packed out 
with people, and, of course, you could never find the things 
you wanted, and if you went late, the assistants, who had 
not drawn a proper breath for several hours, hated the 
sight of you and would not help. At last the army of ad- 
vertising managers, copy writers, commercial artists, colour 
printers, window dressers, bill posters, which had been 
screaming ‘Buy, buy. Christmas is coming. Buy, buy, 
buy' for weeks and weeks, was charging to victory. Lon- 
don was looting itself. Those damp, dark afternoons 
seemed to rain people down into the shopping streets; 
whole suburbs burst upon Oxford Street, Holborn, Regent 
Street; the shops themselves were full, the pavements were 
jammed, and the vehicles on the crowded road could hold 
no more. Never before had Miss Matfield seen so many 
boxes of figs and dates, obscenely naked fowls, cheeses, 
puddings in basins, beribboned cakes, and crackers, so 



304 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

much morocco and limp leather and su&de and pig-skin, 
so many calendars, diaries, engagement books, bridge 
scorers, fountain-pens, pencils, patent lighters, cigarette- 
holders, dressing-cases, slippers, handbags, manicure sets, 
powder-bowls, and 'latest novelties/ There were several 
brigades of Santa Clauses, tons and tons of imitation holly, 
and enough cotton-wool piled in the windows and dabbed 
on the glass to keep the hospitals supplied for the next 
ten years. Between those festive windows and a line of 
hawkers, street musicians, beggars, there passed a million 
women dragging after them a million children, who, after 
a brief space in some enchanted wonderland, were dazed, 
tired, peevish, wanting nothing but a rest and another 
bun. From a million bags, bags of every conceivable 
shape and colour, money, wads of clean pound notes 
straight from the bank, dirty notes from the vase on the 
mantelpiece, half-crowns and florins from the tin box in 
the bedroom, money that had come showering down out 
of the blue, money that had been stolen, money that had 
been earned, begged, hoarded up, was being pushed over 
counters and under little glass windows and then con- 
jured into little parcels, parcels, parcels, with whole acres 
of brown paper and miles of string called into service every 
few minutes. Hundreds of these parcels, especially the 
huge three-cornered ones, seemed to find their way into 
every bus that Miss Matfield, after waiting and running 
forward and returning and waiting again, contrived to 
board. She felt like a shivering and bruised ant. Never 
had she hated London so much. She wanted to scream at 
it. When she got back to the Club, the only thing she 
wished to do was to have a long hot soak in the bath, and 
of course it was precisely the thing that everybody else 
wanted to do too, so she would find herself hanging about 
still waiting, after waiting to leave the office, waiting to 
get a bus, waiting to be served in the shop, waiting at the 
cash desk, waiting for her parcel, waiting for another bus; 
and then Kersey would come up and say: ‘Going out to- 
night, Matfield? No? Well, you can't expect to go out 
every night, can you, dee-ar ? * Hell ! 

Mr. Golspie left for Paris — lucky man — on the morning 
of Christmas Eve; Mr. Dersingham wished them all a merry 
Christmas and departed earlv; Mr. Smeeth gave them all 



MISS MATFIELD’S NEW YEAR 305 

an extra week’s money, brightened up a little, and hoped 
they would have a very good time. Miss Matfield, after 
working miracles, arrived at Paddington, a Paddington 
that suggested that some invading army had already 
reached the Bank and that shells were falling into Hyde 
Park and that the seat of government had already been 
transferred to Bristol, and she was just in time to get three- 
quarters of a seat and no leg space in the 5.46. The lights 
of Westbourne Park and Kensal Green, such as they were, 
blinked at her and then were gone. Thank God she was 
done with this nightmare of a London for a few days! Per- 
haps Christmas at home this time would be amusing. At 
any rate, it would be reasonable and quiet, and her father 
and mother would be glad to see her, and she would be glad 
to see them. As the train gathered speed, shrugging off 
the outer western suburbs, she thought of her parents with 
affection, and for a little time felt nearer thje child she 
had once been, the child who had thought her father and 
mother so wonderful and had found Christmas the most 
radiant and magical season, than she had done for many 
a month. She closed her eyes; her mouth gradually lost 
its discontented curve; her whole face softened. Angel 
Pavement would hardly have recognized her. 


hi 

’Hello, Matfield! What sort of a Christmas did you 
have? ’ 

’Oh, the usual thing, you know — rather feeble.’ 

‘ Do anything special ? ’ 

’No, just stodged and sat about and yawned. Stayed 
in bed every morning for breakfast and never got up till 
nearly lunch time. That was about the best thing that 
happened. What about you ? ’ 

’Oh, awful!’ replied the other girl, Miss Preston, who 
worked at the Levantine Bank, but based her claim to at- 
tention at the Club on the fact that her brother, under an- 
other name, was a well-known actor. He had visited the 
Club twice, and each time Preston’s reputation had soared. 
'The minute I got home I started the vilest cold, and then 
Archie — my brother, you know, the actor — had promised 



306 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

to come for Christmas, but wired at the last second that 
he couldn't.' 

‘Hard luck!' cried Miss Matfield, but not with much 
conviction. You had to give out so much sympathy at the 
Burpenfield that you were apt to become very mechanical, 
and if something really terrible and tragic had happened 
there, if, for example, half a dozen girls had gone down 
with ptomaine poisoning, the other girls would probably 
have been struck dumb, having overworked so long all the 
possible expressions of pity and horror. 

Now they were all discussing their holidays. The 
youngish ones, who had probably enjoyed themselves 
thoroughly, were mostly going about crying ‘Vile! Abso- 
lutely ghastly, my dear! ' The oldish ones, the lonely hot- 
water-bottle enthusiasts, who had probably had nothing 
but a mocking shadow of a Christmas, were busy pre- 
tending, with a strained creaking brightness, that they had 
had a wonderful time. The members in between these two 
groups, such as Miss Matfield, gave fairly truthful accounts. 
The entrance hall, the lounge, the stairs and the corridors 
above, all buzzed with these descriptions. The Burpenfield 
Club was returning to its normal life. With admirable 
forethought, Miss Tattersby had pinned up half a dozen 
new notices all written in her most exclamatory and sar- 
donic style, and already these notices, especially a very 
bitter and tyrannical one about washing stockings and 
handkerchiefs, were feeding the mounting flames of talk. 
'My dear, but have you seen Tatters' latest?' they cried, 
along the landings and in and out of their little bedrooms. 

Miss Matfield went up to her little room, found a space 
on the wall for two framed Medici prints she had brought 
back from home, cleared out of her tiny bookshelf several 
books she had borrowed and forgotten to return, and put in 
their place some books she had contrived to borrow during 
the holidays. There were two travel books and three 
novels or romances, and all three stories had for their 
settings such places as Borneo and the South Seas. This 
was not a mere coincidence. Miss Matfield liked her 
fiction to be full of jungles, coral reefs, plantations, lagoons, 
hibiscus flowers, the scent of vanilla, schooners on the wide 
Pacific, tropical nights. So long as the young man was 
first shown to her dressed in white and lounging on a 



MISS MATFIELD’S NEW YEAR 307 

veranda, while a noiseless brown figure brought him 
something long and cool to drink, she was ready to follow 
his love story to the end. If the story had no love in it but 
had the right exotic setting, she would read it, but she 
preferred a fairly strong love interest. She had not bad 
taste, and if the story was written for her by Joseph Conrad, 
so much the better; but she was ready to endure if not to 
delight in authors of a very different cut from Conrad if 
they would only give her the jungles and lagoons and coral 
reefs and mysterious brown faces. The worst story about 
Malaysia was preferable to the best story about Marylebone. 
She did all her reading on the bus to and from the office, 
in some teashop at lunch time, and in bed, and as her one 
desire was to escape from any further consideration of buses, 
teashops, and girls' club bedrooms, these stories of the other 
end of the world, strange, savage, beautiful, might have 
been specially created for her; indeed, many of them were. 
She never admitted that she had a passion for these exotic 
and adventurous tales. She did homage to thejn negatively 
by looking through other and very different novels, novels 
about London and Worcestershire, and then sneering 
heavily at them. A long acquaintance with these heroes 
in bungalows and schooners and bars run by Chinese had 
gradually shaped and coloured her attitude towards men, 
though here again she admitted nothing and only paid these 
distant creatures a negative tribute, by criticizing adversely 
the fellows who were quite different and much nearer home. 
The idea of a man that warmed her secret heart was that 
of the strong, adventurous, roving male with a background 
of alien scenes, of little ships and fantastic drinking haunts. 
If she married him, she might want to domesticate him 
in that beautiful old country house in which she had spent 
so many imaginary Christmases, but he would have to be 
that kind of man first, and not born in captivity. 

It was not possible to change her room very much — 
though she always tried after being away — because it was 
far too small; it was like trying to re-arrange three or four 
toys in a boot box; but now, as before, she did what she 
could. She had come back determined, as she told herself, 
to fight against the Burpenfield atmosphere. No more 
drooping and whining, no more waiting for something to 
turn up while you knew all the time it wouldn't, no more 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


310 

‘She is,' said Miss Cadnam. ' Aren't you, Mattie? She 's 
just been telling me that she 's come back full of grand 
resolutions/ 

‘Ugh! 1 Miss Morrison looked disgusted. ‘Don’t tell 
me you 've made up your mind to spend all your 
evenings learning Italian and German or something like 
that/ 

‘ You 're quite wrong/ 

‘Quite/ 

‘Thank the Lord for that/ said Miss Morrison. ‘It 
would have been completely foul. Besides, you 're not 
young enough and not old enough, if you see what I mean, 
for that sort of thing. When 1 was a few years younger, 
I used to come back full of good intentions and ambition 
and tell myself I was going to learn commercial Spanish 
or qualify as an accountant or something equally crazy. 
You feel like that after the holidays. But what 's this 
new attitude ? ' 

It was explained to her, and she listened with a dubious 
smile on her smooth pale face. ‘Ah, my children,' she 
said, ‘I like to hear you talk. I, too, have felt like that 
in my time. It won't work.' 

‘In your time! Why, Morrison, I 'm two years older 
than you at least,' cried Miss Matfield. 

‘And I'm nearly as old as you, Morrison/ said Miss 
Cadnam. ‘I'm getting terribly old.' 

‘It isn't just the years, little ones. It 's the experience. 
You make me feel old with your charming youthful illu- 
sions. However, I 'm all for you leading a dashing worldly 
life, Matfield. I 'm all in favour of you going to the devil, 
for that matter. How do you do it, by the way? I used 
to hear an awful lot of vague talk about the temptations 
of a poor girl’s life in London. Where do they come in? 
Nobody ever tempts me. The only temptations I have 
are to steal some of my worthy employeress's terribly ex- 
pensive bath salts when I *m allowed to enter her bathroom 
to wash my hands, and — there must be something else — 
yes, not to give the bus conductor my penny when he 
doesn't ask for it. What chance have I then to be really 
virtuous or to be wicked either? I admit, Matfield, that 
you 're different. You go down to the great City, to begin 
with, and meet mysterious men on romantic ships ' 



MISS MATFIELD'S NEW YEAR 311 

* When was this ? ' cried Miss Cadnam. ' Did you, Mattie, 
or is she making it up ? ' 

‘Quiet, child! You will understand in time. And then 
again, my dear Matfield, you have a look. I don't say you 
look terribly marvellous, my dear * 

* I don't pretend to,' Miss Matfield told her. 

‘But there's a something — a hint, you might say, of 
dark, wild forces. I don't suppose you have any, really, 
but there 's a look. That 's where you completely beat 
me. I haven't that look at all, whereas if people only 
knew what I was really like — well, never mind. But you 
have it, though if I were you — particularly now, when 
you 've made up your mind to be a One — I should do my 
hair rather differently. You ought to have it out at the 
side more. I '11 show you what I mean. You watch, 
Cadnam, and see if you don't agree.' 

‘Ye-es, I think you're probably right,' said Miss Mat- 
field finally. 

‘By the way,' said Miss Morrison, ‘there's a dance 
here on New Year's Eve. And as nobody has asked me 
anywhere else, I think I '11 go, and I might be able to per- 
suade a couple of men I know vaguely to look in. They 're 
not very bright lads, but they 're energetic and harmless 
and better than nothing. What about you, Matfield? 
A dance at the Burpenfield is perhaps hardly a proper 
start on the downward path — but still, you never know.' 

‘Oh, yes, I'll be there,' said Miss Matfield. But she 
wasn't. 


IV 

Many a time afterwards, Miss Matfield wondered if Mr. 
Golspie deliberately engineered that staying late on New 
Year's Eve. She never asked him and never made up her 
own mind about it. At the time, it seemed accidental 
enough. He had looked in at the office during the morn- 
ing, had gone out quite soon and had not returned until 
six o'clock, when they were all busy clearing off the last 
odds and ends of work. Mr. Dersingham had already 
gone. Mr. Golspie arrived, shouted for her, and went 
into the private office. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


312 

'Sorry, Miss Matfield,' he began, 'but I 'll have to ask 
you to do a bit of work for me at once/ 

'What, now? ' 

'Yes, now. Don't look at me like that, Miss Matfield 
— spoiling your handsome features. It can't be helped, 
and an extra hour for once isn't going to hurt you, is it? ' 

'I suppose not, Mr. Golspie. It 's only — well, it 's New 
Year's Eve, isn't it? ' 

'So it is. I 'd clean forgotten. Old Year's Night, we 
always use to call it. Still, there '11 be plenty of it left 
when we 've finished.' 

'Yes, that 's all right — only I 'd arranged to go to a dance 
to-night.' 

'O-ho, the gay life, eh?' he boomed, grinning at her. 
‘Now I remember, my daughter's going to one to-night. 
One of these balloon, confetti, and false noses affairs, eh? 
Champagne at midnight, eh?' 

'No such luck. It 's only a dance at the girls' club where 
I live, a very modest affair.’ 

'Oh, a dance at a girls' club, eh? That 's nothing. 
You’re as well off here with me as at a dance at a girls' 
club. What time does it start ? ' 

'About nine, I suppose.' 

'I shan't keep you here until nine, unless you want me 
to. Now you go back and finish what you were doing, and 
you can tell the rest of 'em they can go when they like, as 
far as I 'm concerned. Then come back here, bring your 
note-book, and we '11 get down to it. I *ve some letters I 
must get off to-night. Somebody ’s got to earn some 
money for this firm, y' know.' 

When she returned to the private office, Mr. Golspie, 
meditating over a cigar and occasionally jotting down some 
figures, motioned her towards a chair and did not speak for 
several minutes. She heard the outer door bang behind 
the other people, going home, heard other doors banging 
and noisy footsteps on the stairs, and then everything 
suddenly sank into silence. 

'Now then/ said Mr. Golspie, 'let 's make a start. You 
can take the whole lot down at once, if you like, or you can 
take two or three, go and type 'em, then come back for 
more, just as you please. All I care about is that they go 
to-night.' 



MISS MATFIELD'S NEW YEAR 313 

She took down several letters, then went to type them 
out while he looked at his figures and thought about the 
rest of them. It was very strange to be at work in the 
deserted general office, to go back to the private office and 
find Mr. Golspie there, almost lost in his cigar smoke, to 
return again to her machine under the solitary light. As 
the quarters of an hour slipped by, so many little noises 
from outside disappeared into the silence that at last she 
did not seem to be working in a place she knew at all. The 
instant the familiar and now cheerful clatter and ping of her 
typewriter stopped, everything turned ghostly, until she 
found herself again in the private office, which was not at 
all ghostly. There was nothing spectral about Mr. Golspie. 

'But what about copying them? 1 she cried, when they 
were all done, all signed, and ready for their envelopes. 
'They can stay uncopied/ replied Mr. Golspie. 

'But, you know, we always copy all letters/ 

'Well, this time we don't. It isn't worth the bother- I 
know what I 've said to these people, and they 're my 
letters, not Dersingham’s. Help me to put them into their 
envelopes and bring some stamps, then we 've done. That 's 
the way. A good job of work, that, Miss Matfield. I 'm 
much obliged. Most girls would have kicked up a fuss 
and then done the work dam’ badly just to show their 
independence. What time is it ! Would you believe it ? — 
nearly eight! I thought I was hungry/ 

Miss Matfield had given a little cry of dismay. 

' Hello, what 's the matter with you ? ' 

' I 'd no idea it was so late, though I feel terribly hungry, 
too. Dinner will be over at the Club when I get back there 
now, though I suppose I shall be in time to get something/ 
'You 're hungry, too, are you? What did you have for 
lunch ? ' 

‘I never had much lunch, you see/ said Miss Matfield. 
‘ I had an egg and a roll and butter and a cup of coffee/ 
'And then you had a cup of tea and a biscuit, and now 
it 's nearly eight and you feel hungry and you think if you 
run all the way back to your Club they '11 give you a bite of 
something there — that 's it, isn't it? Well, that 's no good 
at all. That 's the way you girls do yourselves in. You 
don't feed. It 's all wrong. If you don't have at least one 
thumping big meal a day in this town at this time o' the 



3M ANGEL PAVEMENT 

year, you might as well send for the doctor at once and 
have done with it. Now, Miss Matfield,' and he rose and 
put a hand on her shoulder, 1 you 're not one of those half- 
starved wizened little monkeys of creatures that pass for 
girls nowadays; you're a fine upstanding girl, a real 
woman; and you can't play those tricks with yourself. 
Now listen — you 're coming to feed with me. We 've both 
been working; we're both hungry; and we're going to 
feed together.' 

'Oh, are we? ' It was all she could find to reply at the 
moment. 

'If you want me to make a favour of it, I '11 do it,' he 
continued. ' Here I am — on the last night of the year, too 
— going to have dinner all by myself, and here are you, as 
hungry as I am, and we 've been working together, and 
you won't join me to cheer me up a bit. How 's that ? ' 

She laughed. ‘All right, I will. Thank you. Only I 
can't go anywhere very marvellous, looking like this, you 
know.' 

'You could go anywhere looking like that, believe me,' 
he assured her. ' But I suppose you mean you 're not 
all dressed up. That doesn’t matter. We 're not going 
where they 're slinging the confetti at one another, we 're 
going where the food is. You go and get ready while I 
stamp these letters.' 

It was a clear cold night. Angel Pavement looked 
strangely dark and deserted, a little black gulf with a faint 
spangle of stars above it. 

'Do you know why I came to your place?' said Mr. 
Golspie, as they walked along. ' I looked up the names of 
the firms in this line of business, and Twigg and Dersingham 
took my fancy not because of their name, but because of the 
address. Angel Pavement did it. I was so tickled by that 
name, I said to myself, “I must have a look at that lot, 
first of all." And if I hadn’t said that, I shouldn't have 
been here, and you wouldn't have been trotting along here 
with me, would you ? ' 

'Didn't you know anything about this business before?' 
she asked. 

'Not a thing. But I 've picked up a good many different 
sorts of business in my time, and I haven't finished yet, not 
by a long chalk. But I don't call this veneer trade a 



MISS MATFIELD’S NEW YEAR 315 

proper business. It ’s a side-line. There 's no size to it. 
You might as well be selling sets o' chessmen or rocking- 
-horses. No size to it, no chance of real growth, you see? 
It 's all right for Dersingham — it 's about his mark — but 
then he 's not really in business. He 's only got one leg in 
it instead of being up to the neck in it. He thinks he 's a 
gentleman amusing himself. Too many of his sort in the 
City here. That 's how the Jews get on, and the Ameri- 
cans. None of that nonsense about them * 

The main road, into which they had turned now, still 
showed a few lighted windows, behind which the last 
orders of the year were being booked and the last entries 
made in the ledgers, and there were still a few belated 
clerks and typists hurrying away on each side; but com- 
pared with its usual appearance, the hooting muddle of the 
day and early evening, its appearance now was that of a 
lighted stone wilderness. A tram came grinding down, 
looking as if it expected nothing. A bus slipped through, 
curiously swift and noiseless. They walked down to the 
end of the road, past the narrow openings of little streets 
and alleys already sunk into midnight and the mouths of 
wider streets that were illuminated emptiness. At the 
bottom they turned to the right. A taxi came jogging 
along at that moment, and Mr. Golspie at once claimed it, 
shouted * Bundle’s ’ to the driver, and then sat very close to 
Miss Matfield. 

'Thought we 'd go to Bundle’s,' he said, 'if it 's all the 
same to you. D’ you know it ? ’ 

'I 've heard of it, of course,’ she told him, ‘but I ’ve 
never been there. It ’s more a restaurant for men, isn’t it ? ‘ 
'More men than women there certainly, but women do 
go. And if they 'd more sense, they ’d go oftener. Bundle’s 
is the place if you ’re really hungry and you want a good 
solid feed. It ’s English, too, and I like it for that — good 
old-fashioned tack. I don’t suppose there ’ll be a lot of 
people there now — lunch is the crowded time at Bundle’s — 
and there 's no need to dress up to go there.' 

' Thank Heaven for that ! ' cried Miss Matfield. 

'Mind you, Bundle’s isn’t a cheap place, by any means,' 
Mr. Golspie continued, apparently anxious to suggest that 
he was not skimping his hospitality. * Don’t get that idea 
into your head. It 's plain, but it works out as expensive 
*l*>* 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


316 

as most places, even though the other places are giving you 
ten courses and a band and rattles and confetti and God 
knows what else. There ’s nothing like that at Bundle's, 
but there ’s real food and some good drink/ 

'Well, Mr. Golspie, I 'll be quite candid, and confess that 
I could do with both at this very moment. Even/ she 
added mischievously, ' if they will cost you a lot of money/ 

'I didn’t say that, Miss Matfield,’ he said, pinching her 
arm. 'All I said was that Bundle’s isn’t cheap. As for 
costing me a lot of money, I don’t honestly think you could 
do if you tried, not at Bundle’s. You *d be sick before you 
could eat that amount, and drunk long before you could 
drink it. I took a feller there, just before Christmas, and 
he did cost me money. He found they had some Waterloo 
brandy there, and fancied a few goes of that after lunch/ 

'Well, suppose I do, too,’ said Miss Matfield, as St. Paul’s 
went jogging past the window on her side of the cab. 
' What about that ? ’ 

‘ I ’ll promise you one, though, if you ask me, it 's a waste 
of beautiful stuff, because I ’m sure you can’t appreciate it. 
But you won’t get any more out of me. If you did, you ’d 
turn round afterwards and tell me I made you drunk. No, 
no/ 

'Don’t be absurd. I was only joking. I don't like 
brandy, as a matter of fact ; the taste of it always reminds 
me of being ill. I loathe whisky, too. I like wine, though, 
you '11 perhaps be glad to know. You will also be glad to 
know that I can drink quite a lot of it — if it ’s good — with- 
out feeling tight.’ 

' All right. Now I know. The sooner he gets there now, 
the better it will be. I’m getting hungrier and hungrier/ 

'So am I. If I ’d gone back to the Club, I ’d never have 
been able to find enough to satisfy my appetite to-night. 
The food ’s not really too bad there, but it isn’t quite real — 
if you know what I mean. It 's like the food you get in 
cheap hotels/ 

‘I know,' said Mr. Golspie grimly. 'You can’t tell me 
anything about cheap hotels and bad grub. And when 
you say it '$ not real, you mean it all tastes alike and never 
quite leaves you satisfied. Nothing like that about Mr. 
Bundle. And here he is/ 

Mr. Bundle, whoever he was, had remembered one 



MISS MATFIELD'S NEW YEAR 317 

simple fact when he first established his tradition of 
catering, and that was that Man is one of the largest 
carnivora . You went to Bundle's to eat meat. The 
kitchen turned out acceptable soups, vegetables, puddings, 
tarts, savouries, and the like, but all these were as nothing 
compared with the meat. The place was a vegetarian's 
nightmare. It seemed to be perpetually celebrating the 
victory of some medieval baron. Whole beeves and droves 
must have been slaughtered daily in its name. If you 
asked for roast beef at Bundle's, they took you at your 
word, and promptly wheeled up to you the red dripping 
half of a roasted ox, and after the waiter had implored you 
to examine it and had asked you a few solemn questions 
about fat and lean, under-done and over-done, he cut you 
off a pound or two here, a pound or two there. A request 
for mutton was not treated perhaps with the same high 
seriousness, but even that meant that legs and shoulders 
came trundling up from all directions, and you found your- 
self facing a few assorted pounds of it on your plate. The 
waiters themselves had a roasted jointy look, though most 
of them were lean and under-done, whereas most of the 
guests were obviously fat and over-done and suffering from 
gigantic blood pressures that took another leap upward 
every time they went out of these doors* It was the 
meatiest place Miss Matfield had ever seen, and she had a 
suspicion that if she had not been feeling really hungry, it 
might have made her feel rather sick. As it was, she 
welcomed the look of it and smell of it, and enjoyed, too, 
its very definite masculine atmosphere. 

Mutton was wheeled at Miss Matfield and beef was 
wheeled at Mr. Golspie, and, while acolytes brought veget- 
ables, the high priests gravely pointed to fat and lean and 
under-done and over-done, and then sliced away with their 
exquisite long narrow knives. Mr. Golspie, after consulting 
briefly with her, ordered a good rich burgundy. Then, 
after Mr. Golspie, a true Bundle's man, had polished off his 
gigantic helping of beef, and Miss Matfield had eaten about 
a third of her mutton, he had a savoury and she had some 
apple tart and cream. 

* We 'll finish the wine before we have coffee/ said Mr. 
Golspie, pointing the bottle at her glass, which she had 
emptied. ‘It's a good burgundy this.' 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


318 

‘ Only about half a glass, please. It 's lovely rich sun- 
shiny stuff, but I daren’t drink much more. I feel as if 
I 'd had about fifteen of my Club dinners rolled into one. 
I don’t believe I shall ever be hungry again/ 

’You look well on it,' said Mr. Golspie, who perhaps 
looked a shade too well on it himself. ‘You've a fine 
colour. Miss Matfield, and your eyes are sparkling, and 
altogether you look full of fight and fun, too good for Angel 
Pavement, I can tell you.' 

‘ Oh, but lam,' she cried humorously. She suddenly felt 
that life was rich and gay. 

‘Of course you are. I said that to myself the first time 
I set eyes on you. There 's a girl with some spirit and 
sense, I thought — she 's alive, not like these other poor 
devils. “She don't belong," I said to myself. That's 
why I kept my eye on you. Did you notice me keeping my 
eye on you ? ' 

‘Mmmm, ye-es,' looking at him and hoping that her eyes 
were still sparkling. ‘Sometimes I thought you seemed 
quite human.' 

‘Human!' he roared, so that a waiter jumped forward. 
'I 'm human enough, I can tell you. I 'm a dam' sight 
too human.' 

‘ If you 're in the City, you can’t be too human, Mr. Gol- 
spie. Not lor me. I 've spent months there sometimes 
and never spoken to any one who seemed to me really 
human Awful creatures. Then people like Mr. Smeeth, 
all grey and withered and not bad really, but just — 
pathetic.' 

‘No, Smeeth 's not a bad feller. But he 's not pathetic. 
He doesn't make me weep, anyhow. All he wants is to be 
safe, that 's what 's the matter with him. Anything to be 
safe — that 's his line. Pay him a pound or two a week, 
give him some little cash-books to play with, tell him he 's 
safe, and he 's as happy as a king. But he 's better than 
that dreary youngster you have in there — what 's his name ? 
— Turgis.' 

'Oli, he 's hopeless, I agree.' 

'Not your style, eh? ' 

' What, Turgis ! Help ! * 

'He 'sa typical specimen ol what they 're breeding here 
now — no sense, no guts, no anything. I can't even re- 



MISS MATFIELD'S NEW YEAR 319 

member the look of the lad, although I see him nearly 
every day. That shows you what impression he makes. 
He might be a shadow flickering about the place.* 

‘I know. And yet that funny little Cockney girl, Poppy 
Sellers, thinks he *s marvellous. I *ve watched her wor- 
shipping him at a distance. Isn't it strange — I mean, the 
way everybody amounts to something different to every- 
body else?' 

‘Well, a lad like that *ull never mean anything to me, 
never amount to anything to anybody, I should think, no 
more than a bit of straw or paper blowing about the streets,* 
said Mr. Golspie. 

The waiter who had jumped forward was still waiting 
expectantly a few yards away. Mr. Golspie called him. 
‘You *11 have some coffee, won't you? And I *m going to 
have some brandy, not the Waterloo, though. Will you 
have a liqueur? Have one of the sweet ones. What about 
a Benedictine or a Kiimmel? What do you say? Here, 
look at the list.' 

She examined it. What fascinating names they had, 
these liqueurs! ‘I don’t know. Shall I? All right then, 
I '11 have a Green Chartreuse.* 

Mr. Golspie lit a cigar and then, over the coffee and 
liqueurs, answered some questions she asked about his 
recent trip abroad, and went rambling on about his ex- 
periences in those Baltic countries and in other places still 
more mysterious and romantic to her. As she listened, 
feeling very gay and confident inside, his blunt staccato 
talk seemed to open a series of little windows upon a 
magical world she had always known to be somewhere 
about, although she had never walked in it herself, and 
his own figure took colour from the blue and golden lights 
flashing through these little windows. He talked in the 
way she had always felt a man should talk. He was so 
tremendously and refreshingly un-Burpenfieldish. And he 
was interested in her; he was not merely filling in an idle 
hour; she attracted him, had attracted him, she felt now, 
for some time; and — oh! — it was all amusing and exciting. 

‘It *s quarter to ten,' Mr. Golspie suddenly announced. 
‘What about that dance of yours? * 

‘Oh, Lord! — I don't know. It *s hardly worth it now. 
What a nuisance! * 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


320 

'Like dancing, eh?' 

'Adore it.' 

' All right. Y ou listen to me. I remember now I had an 
invitation from one or two of those Anglo-Baltic chaps; they 
weren't giving the show, but a friend of theirs was, and 
a lot of people I know were going to be there. Dancing, 
too. We '11 go there, and then you won't be able to say 
I 've done you out of your Old Year's Night celebration. 
What d' you say? Good! I 've got the telephone number 
down in my note-book, and now I '11 just ring up to make 
sure. Shan't be a minute.' 

He returned, smiling, with the news that the party had 
just begun. 'Yes, I know what you 're trying to say now,' 
he continued. 'What about clothes, eh? Well, any 
clothes are right for this affair. They 're not a dressy lot. 
If you went without clothes, they wouldn't care. We '11 
have to stop on the way to buy something— a bottle or 
two and something to eat — to take with us. It 's not 
necessary, but it '11 be appreciated. These people will be 
a change for you — not the sort you meet in a girls' club at 
all — and it '11 amuse you, if you 're the girl I take you to be.* 

There wasn't even time to ask him then what exactly 
was the girl he took her to be. 


v 

They went in a taxi and the place was somewhere Not- 
ting Hill way, but that was as near as she ever came to 
knowing where it was. She could have asked, of course, 
but she preferred to be without exact information ; it was 
more amusing. The road in which they finally stopped 
looked one of those dingy shabby-genteel streets, but she 
could not be sure even about that. They walked up a 
garden path, but instead of going up the steps to the house 
itself, they turned to the right, by the side of the house, 
until they came to a lighted door and a great deal of noise. 
Apparently the party was being held in one of those large 
detached studios. 

She found herself shaking hands with a very small 
woman with frizzy black hair, tiny black eyes that seemed 
to jump and snap, a long humorous nose, and an out- 



MISS MATFIELD'S NEW YEAR 321 

rageous purple dress. After that she shook hands with a 
very tall fair man who looked like a retired Siegfried. 
These were obviously the host and hostess, and they were 
both foreigners, but she never caught their names. Clearly 
it was the sort of party at which names were of little im- 
portance. The studio was filled with people, most of whom 
had a foreign look. None of the men wore evening dress, 
and among the women, she was glad to see, there was an 
astonishing variety of clothes, so that she was not at all 
conspicuous. Mr. Golspie recognized a good many ac- 
quaintances, and she was introduced to some of them,* 
mostly youngish men of a nondescript foreign appearance 
who drew themselves up sharply, looked grave for a mo- 
ment, then suddenly smiled and widened their eyes, as if 
to say ‘ I am being introduced to a lady, by my friend Mr. 
Golspie. This is serious, important. Ah, but how charm- 
ing, how beautiful a lady 1 ' It was a pleasure being intro- 
duced to men with such a manner. One of them, the 
youngest, a nice, smiling boy with bright hazel eyes, called 
Something-insky, insisted upon her smoking 7 a long cigar- 
ette, and brought her a mysterious, greeny-yellow drink. 
Mr. Golspie, who had found a whisky and soda, grinned at 
her, and exchanged knowing remarks in a mixed language 
with various men, who patted him on the shoulder and 
slapped him on the back and were patted and slapped 
in return. 

The little hostess, her eyes snapping furiously, came 
rushing through and screamed in an unknown tongue at 
two young men in a corner, a small crooked Jew, almost 
a hunchback, and a thin, red-haired young man, very 
serious behind enormous spectacles. When she finished 
screaming at them and had held out both her arms in an 
imploring gesture, these two bowed gravely, and then the 
Jew sat down at the grand piano and the red-haired 
spectacled one seated himself behind some drums. They 
began playing — and very well they played, too — and 
in a moment the centre of the room was cleared for . 
dancing. 

‘You veel danz, eh? Pleass?' said Something-insky. 

He was a good dancer, and though he was not quite tall 
enough for her, they got on very well together. As he 
piloted her in and out, for nearly everybody was dancing 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


322 

and the floor was crowded, he talked the whole time. * I 
study here ee-conom-eegs,' he told her, 'at Lon-don School 
of Ee-conom-eegs/ and he was very serious about his 
economics, but it was difficult to understand much of what 
he said about them. Very soon he passed to more intimate 
matters. 'Yes, I like Eng-lish girls vairy moch. Oh, but 
I am vairy saad, vairy, vairy saad now/ he told her, his 
hazel eyes dancing with pleasure. ' I leef in High-gate and 
in High-gate I have a girl, an Eng-lish girl, vairy beautiful 
— Flora. She leefs, too, in High-gate, Flora, and she has 
blue eyess and golden hair. For two veeks, you see, we 
have a quarrel. Oh, yes, it is vairy seely, but it is vairy 
saad, too. One night I go to movees. I ask Flora to go 
too, but no — she cannot go. So I go-by-myself. I am 
standing outside and I see a girl I know, a girl from High- 
gate. Vairy nice girl — but — aw, she is noding to me. 
But I am pol-ite, I say to her, " Good evening, mees, you go- 
to movees, too ? '' I am by-myself . I take her weet me into 
movees. Noding, noding at all. But after, she tell Flora 
— at High-gate — "Oh, I go weet your foreign friend to 
movees/' Flora comes to me and we have a beeg quarrel/ 
He squeezed Miss Matfield’s hand as if he felt that at this 
point he must have sympathy or die. ' Yes, a beeg quarrel. 
For two veeks, I do not see Flora at all. I am vairy saad 
now/ 

Miss Matfield said it was rather sad, but told herself 
that in its mixture of Highgate and foreign-ness it was 
really quite absurd and wonderlandish, and somehow it 
gave the key to the whole evening. Nobody in this studio, 
except herself and Mr. Golspie (and she was not sure 
about him), was quite real. Something-insky and his 
friends were very charming, but it was rather a relief when 
Mr. Golspie marched up, very solid and dominating, and 
said: 'Well, what about a dance with me? * 

'Of course/ she told him. 'I thought perhaps you 
didn't dance. You 've not been dancing, have you? * 

‘ No. I thought I 'd wait for you, Miss Matfield. You 're 
the partner I want. I can dance all right, but, mind you, 
I don't pretend to be good at it, not like some of these lads. 
Have another drink before we start, eh?' 

'If I have another drink to-night, I shall probably be 
quite drunk. I feel hazy now.' 



MISS MATFIELD’S NEW YEAR 323 

'No harm in feeling hazier. I *11 look after you, don't 
you worry/ 

But she shook her head. The music started again, the 
little Jew wagging his black locks over the piano and his 
companion solemnly nodding above his drums, and Mr. 
Golspie grasped her masterfully. He was obviously not 
a very good dancer, but even if he had been, there would 
not have been much chance for him to show what he 
could do in that crowded space, for now there seemed to 
be twice as many people on the floor. 

'How d* you like this show? ' he asked, grinning at hen 

‘I do like it. It 's amusing/ 

'I 'm glad you think so/ 

'You sound as if you don't care for it very much/ 

'It 's not bad/ he told her. 'But too much of a crowd 
for my liking. Just the pair of us somewhere would please 
me better/ 

Afterwards there was an interval, during which every- 
body ate and drank and smoked and talked all at once, 
and a girl who appeared to be a secretary at some legation 
came up with Something-insky and another, older man, 
and the girl who was a secretary was very giddy and gay 
and apparently rather tight, though not unpleasantly so, 
and then a little foreign girl with a hideous fur-trimmed 
jacket joined them, and the six of them made a little group 
in one corner, where they ate and drank and smoked 
and talked as hard as anybody. Then the little hostess 
screamed again, and this time the tall host produced a 
number of astonishing syllables in a rasping tenor and then 
put on a colossal smile, and at once everybody sat down 
somewhere and most of the lights were turned out. Only 
the comer where the Jew still sat at the piano was fully 
illuminated. Then there appeared in front of the piano a 
smallish plump man with an enormous head and yellow 
fat face, who stood there, smiling vaguely at them while 
they applauded, like another but alien Humpty-Dumpty. 
The Jew played a few sonorous and melancholy chords. 
Humpty-Dumpty put his hand to his mouth, as if to press 
a button, for when he lowered his hand, his face was quite 
different; the smile had been wiped off; his eyebrows had 
descended at least an inch and a half; and his eyes stared 
tragically out of deep hollows. Miss Matfield noticed all 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


324 

these details. It was queer, but though things in general 
were curiously hazy, she had only to concentrate her atten- 
tion upon anything and every detail of it, like Humpty- 
Dumpty^ lips and eyebrows, stood out in clear relief. 
This made everything seem tremendously amusing, and 
she was very happy. Humpty-Dumpty began singing now 
in a great rich bass voice, which immediately plunged Miss 
Matfield, who delighted in rich bass voices, into a dreamy 
ecstasy. He sang one song after another, sometimes sink- 
ing into the profoundest melancholy and the bitterness of 
death, and at other times breaking into high spirits that 
were as strange and wild as a revolution. With her eyes 
fixed on that great yellow moon of a face from which these 
entrancing sounds came, Miss Matfield allowed her mind 
to be carried floating away on these changing currents of 
music, and her body to rest against the stalwart arm and 
shoulder of Mr. Golspie. She was sorry when it came to 
an end, and Humpty-Dumpty, after bowing, smiling, 
frowning, shaking his head in an amazingly rapid succes- 
sion, walked away to eat a whole plateful of sandwiches, 
wash them down with lager beer, and talk to five people 
at once with his mouth full. 

There was just time for another dance, and then it was 
twelve o'clock. Everybody was silent for a moment. At 
the end of that moment, they all behaved like men and 
women who had been reprieved in the very shadow of the 
gallows, which is perhaps how they saw themselves. Never 
before had Miss Matfield seen such a raising and clinking of 
glasses, so much back-slapping, hand-shaking, embracing, 
and kissing. Something-insky kissed the little girl in the 
fur-trimmed jacket and the secretary girl from the legation, 
and then kissed Miss Matfield's hand fifteen times while 
the girl in the fur-trimmed coat, who had suddenly burst 
into tears, kissed her on the cheek. Mr. Golspie shook her 
by the hand, then gave her a big hug. It was at this 
moment that the only unpleasant event of the evening 
occurred. Once or twice before, Miss Matfield had had to 
escape from a tall bleary-eyed man, one of the very few 
Englishmen there, who was rather drunk and had been 
bent on dancing with her. Now he suddenly lurched into 
the middle of their little group, murmuring something 
about a happy New Year, and tried to embrace her. Mr. 



MISS MATFIELD’S NEW YEAR 325 

Golspie, however, stepped forward smartly, and with one 
shove of his heavy shoulder sent the man reeling back. 

'I think I’d better go now,’ she said to Mr. Golspie. 
‘I 'm terribly late as it is/ 

'All right. I *11 come with you/ Taking no notice of 
the unpleasant fellow, who was mumbling threats just 
behind them, he took her by the arm, marched her through 
the crowd to shake hands with the host and hostess, and 
then led her towards the door. There they separated to 
look for their things. When Miss Matfield returned to the 
little entrance hall of the studio, the unpleasant man was 
there. Fortunately, Mr. Golspie appeared, too. 

'Now wha ’s the idea, ch?’ said the unpleasant one, 
thickly and truculently to Mr. Golspie, trying to put a 
hand on his shoulder. 

'The idea is — you go home to bed/ replied Mr. Golspie, 
giving him one contemptuous glance. 

‘Home to bed!’ the other sneered. ' T-M-t-t-talk like 
a dam’ fool. Bed!' Then he recollected himself. ‘All 
I wanner do is to wish thisli young lady a Hap-py New 
Year/ And he made a clutch at her. 

This time Mr. Golspie instantly pinned both the man’s 
arms to his side with so powerful a grasp that the man 
cried out. 'Talk like a dam' fool, do I ? ' said Mr. Golspie, 
pushing his face forward. 'If you don’t make yourself 
scarce, you '11 start the worst new year you ever remembered. 
See?’ And he shook the man. ‘See?’ And with that 
he sent the man flying back, took three or four steps for- 
ward to see if any more persuasion was needed, and when 
he saw it was not — for the man had obviously had quite 
enough of Mr. Golspie — he returned to Miss Matfield’s side. 
‘I’ve rung up for a taxi/ he said calmly. 'There’s a 
telephone in there, where I had my hat and coat. It ’ll 
be here in a minute. We ’ll wait just outside and get a 
breath of fresh air.’ 

Miss Matfield, who had been half frightened, half elated 
by the little scene, and now, what with the wine and the 
dancing and the music and the embracing and the general 
excitement of the long evening, was in a fantastic condition, 
tired and excited and timid and audacious and thrilled all 
at once, followed her brutal or heroic friend out of the 
studio and into the shadow of the neighbouring house. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


326 

Just before the shadow ended, he stopped. ‘We can wait 
here as well as anywhere/ he said. 

She did not tell him that it would be still more sensible 
to wait at the front gate. She stopped, and said nothing. 

‘Well, that wasn’t bad/ he said, 4 though I ’d had enough 
of it when you said you had to go. They ’ll keep it up till 
the milk comes. I shouldn’t have gone, though, if you 
hadn't said you 'd come with me. If you want to know 
my opinion, we # ve had a good Old Year's Night. We 've 
got to see more of each other.' 

1 Oh, have we ? ' She was in no condition to be femininely 
cool and mocking, but she did her best. 

‘Yes, of course, we have,’ he replied coolly. 'You're 
the sort of girl 1 like, and I don’t often find one.' 

‘Thank you for the compliment,' she said, and was 
instantly annoyed with herself for sounding so feeble. 

‘Well, Miss Matfield — oh, damn it, I can't keep calling 
you Miss Matfield, not out of the office, anyhow. What 's 
your other name? ' 

‘Lilian/ she replied, in a tiny voice. 

'That 's good — Lilian. Well, Lilian, now that we 're out 
of that monkey house in there, with everybody snatching 
and pecking at each other, I can wish you a proper Happy 
New Year.’ And, saying no more, he swept her to him, 
kissed her several times, and held her close, so close that 
she could hardly breathe. 

She could not have described it as being either pleasant 
or unpleasant. It was not an experience that could fall 
into such easy categories. It could not be tasted, examined, 
reported on, like most of Miss Matfield's experiences. If it 
belonged anywhere, it belonged to the fire, flood, and earth- 
quake department. Her quickening blood faced and replied 
to this huge masculine onslaught, but the rest of her was 
simply dazed and shaken. 

‘There 's our taxi,' he said, breathing hard, but otherwise 
cool enough. ‘ What 's the address ? ' 

Inside the taxi she suddenly felt very tired and quite 
disinclined to talk. She drooped, leaned against him, and 
could only repeat to herself that it was all quite absurd, 
though all the time she knew very well that whatever else 
it might be, it was not absurd. Mr. Golspie was quiet too, 
though in that little enclosed space he seemed now a 



MISS MATFIELD’S NEW YEAR 327 

gigantically vital creature, a being essentially different 
from herself, a huge throbbing engine of a man. 

'Getting near your place? ’ he inquired, as the taxi began 
to mount the hill. 

'Yes, it *s only about half-way up this hill.’ 

'We'll have some more nights out together, shall we? 
Not all like this, y* know. Just the two of us, roaming 
round a bit, going to a show or two, and so on. What 
d' you say ? ' 

'Yes, I *d like to. In fact — I *d love it.’ She glanced 
out of the window, then rapped on it. ' Wc ’re just outside 
now. Please, don’t come out. No, no more. All right, 
then — there! Good-bye — and — and thank you for my 
nice big dinner.* r 

The dance was over at the Club and most of the lights 
were out, but a few girls were still drifting about the hall 
and chattering softly on their way upstairs. 

‘ Hello, Matfield! * somebody cried. ‘ Happy New Year! ’ 

Would it be? It had begun strangely enough. Now 
that she was back in the familiar and despised Burpenfield 
atmosphere, the night's antics ought to have appeared in 
retrospect gayer and more delightfully adventurous than 
ever, with Mr. Golspie directing them like a droll and 
massive fairy prince ; but oddly enough, they cut no such 
figure and she found herself wanting to avoid the thought 
of them. As she slowly climbed the darkening stairs she 
shivered a little. She was tired, rather cold, and her head 
ached. There floated into her mind, as if borne there by 
white virginal sails, the comforting thought of aspirin and 
her hot-water bottle. 


VI 

When he asked her, two days later, to spend another 
evening with him, she gladly accepted, although she had 
told herself several times before that she would refuse; 
and after that they spent a good deal of time together. 
They would have dinner somewhere, and then amuse them- 
selves by visiting some show of his choice. They saw the 
new Jerry Jemingham musical comedy and a crook play; 
they went twice to the Colladium; they tried a talkie or 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


328 

two; and one exciting night he took her to a big boxing 
match. She never really learned a great deal about him; 
he would talk about odd experiences he had had by the 
hour, but he remained mysterious; she never discovered 
what his plans were, and at times she suspected that he 
did not intend to stay in England much longer, but this 
suspicion was only based on casual vague remarks; she 
never went near his flat, never met his daughter, and 
never heard a single word from him about his dead wife, 
if indeed she was dead; and yet she felt she knew him as 
she had never known a man before. Sometimes he was 
simply friendly or uncle-ish, dismissing her with a pat on 
the shoulder or a squeeze of the arm; sometimes he turned 
cynically and grossly amorous, and when he tried to paw 
her and she repulsed him, he jeered at her and said things 
that were all the more brutal because there was in them a 
hard core of truth, and then she saw him as a gross middle- 
aged toper, loathed him, and despised herself for having 
anything to do with him; but then, at other times, after a 
happy exciting evening, he would reach out to her in sud- 
den passion and her own mood would flare up to match 
with his, and in some little patch of darkness or in the taxi 
going home, they would kiss and clutch and strain to one 
another, without a single word of love passing between 
them, and she would be left shaken and gasping, unable 
to decide whether she was a woman who was falling in love 
with this strange unlikely man or a crazy little fool who 
had just had too much excitement and wine, who ought to 
go and have a good hot bath and learn sense and decency. 
And that was all, so far, though even she guessed it could 
not go on like that. Meanwhile, between these curious 
expeditions, she chatted and grumbled as usual at the Club, 
wrote home in the old strain once a week, and quietly 
worked away at the office, where nobody knew what was 
happening to her. 

Then, one night, as he took her back to the Club, he 
said, quite casually: ‘I see they 're having a nice fine spell 
on the South Coast. What about a trip down there next 
week-end, Lilian ? Might get hold of a car/ 

‘Oh, yes,' she cried at once, without thinking, for week- 
ends out of London were her dream, even in January.* 
'Let 's do that,' 



MISS MATFIELD'S NEW YEAR 329 

* Is it a bargain? ' he said quickly, triumphantly. 

And then she realized what it meant. 1 No, no. I 'm 
sorry. I spoke without thinking/ 

'Ah, she spoke without thinking, did she? You do far 
too much thinking. Girls shouldn’t think too much, not 
good-looking ones, anyhow. When I first met you, you 'd 
done nothing but think for a long time, and you weren’t 
looking too cheerful on it.’ 

She made no reply. She was annoyed, partly because 
she was compelled to recognize the truth behind this little 
jeer. When he talked about her in his casual, rather 
brutal fashion, he had a strange knack of fastening upon 
some unpleasant truth. He seemed to take aim quite 
wildly, but somewhere in her mind, a b&l rang nearly 
every time. 

He changed his tone now. 'Oh, come on. Nobody's 
going to hurt you. Let 's enjoy ourselves while we 're here.' 

'No, thank you/ she said quietly, though she found it 
far more difficult to resist this kind of appeal. 

He pressed her. 

' No, I won't. Some time, perhaps. But hot now. No, 
I mean it.' 

'Well, I *m disappointed in you. Still, I '11 try again. 
Otherwise, y' know, you might regret saying that, some 
day. Oh, you can laugh ' 

‘I might well laugh. I think men are the limit. You 
just want your own way, no matter what it costs — to me, 
and you 're quite hurt and disappointed because you can't 
have it, and anybody would think to hear you that you 'd 
been spending weeks thinking it all out purely for my 
benefit.' 

'That 's right,' said Mr. Golspie cheerfully, and she knew, 
though she could not see him properly, that he was grin- 
ning. ' Just what I have been doing. That 's why I 'm 
disappointed.' 

'And that's why I 'm laughing/ she retorted, though 
she did not feel like laughing now. 'At your impudent 
selfishness. Marvellous I ' 

' And I tell you, young woman, you might regret it one 
day. I 'm going to ask you again. You think it over/ 

- 'I won't.' 

But she did think it over, and unfortunately she began 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


330 

that very night, so that it was hours and hours before she 
got to sleep. Her angry taut body refused to relax; her 
head was a huge hot ring round which her thoughts went 
galloping dustily: and as she turned in the uneasy dark- 
ness she heard the late taxis and cars go hooting far away, 
melancholy hateful sounds in the deep night, like flying 
rumours of disaster. 



CHAPTER IX 


MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 
I 

‘Where are you going to?’ asked Mr. Smeeth, turning 
round in his chair to look at his wife, who had suddenly 
made her appearance in the doorway, wearing her hat and 
coat. She was still flushed with temper. It was sur- 
prising how young and smart she looked. Still, she could 
not go on like that, no matter how young and smart she 
looked. 

‘Out,’ she replied, with that special look and special 
voice she had for him when they had quarrelled. Oh dear! 

‘Yes, I know that,' he pointed out, 'but where you 
going to?’ 

Up she blazed then, with her colour flaming and her 
fine blue eyes flashing at him: ‘Just out, and that ’s enough 
for you. Begrudge every penny you give me, keep me as 
short as you possibly can, tell me I mustn’t buy this and 
mustn’t buy that, go peeping and spying about and then 
lose your silly temper because you 've seen something you 
don’t like to see — though — goodness me! — there can’t be 
a woman in this street who hasn’t a few bills like that in 
the house, and most of them a lot more and instalments, 
too, to pay and their husbands not bringing in anything 

like what you are ’ Here Mrs. Smeeth stopped, not 

because this fine rhetorical sentence had got out of control 
(it had, but she was capable of finishing it somehow), but 
simply because she wanted to draw a deep breath. 'And 
then you want to know where I ’m going I I suppose you 'd 
like me to give an account of that as well, wouldn’t you? 
Yes, of course. Oh, of course! ' Her head wagged as she 
brought out these vast sneers. 'That would be very nice 
for you, wouldn’t it? I ’ll come and ask if I can spend a 
penny or tuppence. Then I ’ll ask if I can walk down the 
road ’ 


33 > 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


332 

'Oh, don't be so silly, Edie,' cried Mr. Smeeth, who 
hated this sort of wild ridiculous talk and could not see 
what good it did. Even after all these years, he was still 
innocent enough to imagine that his wife was trying to 
argue and failing absurdly, and he did not realize that 
she was merely exploding into speech. 

'Don't be so silly!' she repeated indignantly, at the 
same time coming forward into the room. 'I 'd like to 
ask somebody who 's the silly one here. They *d soon tell 
you. And I 'd rather be silly than mean. Yes — mean . 
If you 're not careful, Herbert Smeeth, you '11 soon be too 
mean to live. Pinching and scraping as if you didn't 
know where the next penny was coming from! And the 
more money you 're getting, the worse you are. It 's 
growing on you, this meanness. My words, I 'd like you 
to be married to some women, that 's all. They 'd teach 
you something about spending.’ 

'No, they wouldn’t,' he said crossly, "cos I wouldn't 
have it, wouldn't have it for a single minute. I 'd soon 
put a stop to their little games. As for being mean, you 
know as well as I do, Edie, I 'm not mean, and never have 
been. There 's nothing you 've ever really wanted, or the 
children either, you haven’t had. But somebody 's got to 
be careful, that 's all. We 're not made of money. When 
I got this rise, I hoped we 'd begin to save properly. 
Anybody *d think to hear you talk they 'd given me the 
Bank of England instead of another pound a week. Have 
a bit of sense, Edie. If we 're going to spend every penny 
we have now and get into debt, where are we going to be 
if anything happens to us? Just tell me that.' 

'And what is going to happen to us? Bless me, the way 
you talk! A proper old Jonah you 're turning into! You 
give me the pip, dad, honestly you do. Anybody 'd think 
to hear you talk that we '11 have to sell up any day. You 
can't enjoy yourself a minute for thinking about what 
might happen to you the year after next or sometime. 
We 've only got to live once and we 've only got to die once, 
and for heaven's sake let 's enjoy ourselves while we can, 
I say.* 

‘Yes, and when we can't — what then? I 've heard this 
kind of talk before, and I know where it lands people. 
And anyhow, I can enjoy myself as well as the next, only 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 333 

I can do it sensibly and I don’t need to spend every penny 
we get and go and ask any Fred Mittys to help me to do it/ 

‘That’s right. Bring him in. I’ve been waiting for 
that, I ’ve just been waiting for that. I wondered how 
long you ’d be able to<keep Fred Mitty out of this. That ’s 
you all over. You got your knife into him the first time 
he came here, and after that, of course, he had to be blamed 
for everything. Go on. Don't mind me. Why don’t you 
say I give him all my housekeeping money, and have 
done with it. Go on.’ 

‘Well, I ’ll say this,’ said Mr. Smeeth, his temper rising. 
‘That bill from Sorley's there ’s been all this bother about 
wouldn’t have been that size and would have been paid 
before now, if you hadn’t taken it into your head to ask 
Mitty and his wife and their guzzling pals up here those 
two nights round Christmas. It 's bad enough them com- 
ing here at all — most men wouldn’t have it for a minute, 
not if they couldn’t stand the sight of 'em and never stayed 
in the house when they were there, like me — hut it ’s fifty 
times worse when you go and run yourself into debt to do 
it, just so they can all swill it down at my expense. It 's 
not good enough, and you know it isn’t/ 

‘Oh, isn’t it? Well, next time Christmas comes round, 
I ’ll tell Fred and everybody else to keep away, and we ’ll 
go into the workhouse, and then you '11 be satisfied. If 
you wasn’t getting too mean to live, you ’d have thought 
nothing about it. You talk as if I owed Sorley’s about 
fifty pounds. Three pounds fifteen, that ’s all it is, and 
you make all this bother.' 

‘Well, it ’s three pound fifteen more than you can pay, 
it seems,' he retorted. 

‘Who says it is? I haven't even asked you to pay it 
yet. Keep your money. I can pay it all right in time. 
Sorley's can wait, for ah I care.’ 

‘ Well, they can’t for all I care. I believe in paying cash 
down and no debts running on, always have done, and you 
know it. And I ’ll have that to pay, just because you 've 
decided to open a free pub for Mitty and his fine little lot. 
That 's what it amounts to/ 

‘That’s right, start again now. You can argue with 
yourself for an hour or two, and see how you like it. I ’m 
going out. And if you want to know, I ’ll tell you where 



334 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

I 'm going. I* m going/ she added deliberately, 'down to 
Fred Mitty's.' 

He was furious, but he knew that he could not prevent 
her from going. He looked at her, and he had to twist 
round in his chair, for she had retreated towards the door : 
* Well, see you come back sober/ he said. 

'What 's that?' 

But he did not repeat it. He wished it unsaid. The 
instant after it had slipped out, he wanted to call it back. 
And, for all her 'What's that?' she had heard him all 
right; she was staring at him now, with some of her high 
•colour gone and her mouth curiously drawn down; her 
whole attitude was different from what it had been during 
their noisy argument; she was really hurt, this time; he 
had gone too far, miles and miles too far. 

'Yes, I heard you, though/ she said quietly, 'and it's 
the nastiest thing, by a long, long way, that you 've said 
to me in twenty years. Did you ever know me come back 
in any other way but sober? ' 

‘No, no/ he muttered. 'I 'm sorry ... bit of a joke.' 
He couldn't look her in the face. 

'Bit of a joke! I wish it was. But it wasn't. You 
meant it, Herbert Smeeth. You meant to be as nasty as 
you could be. There ’s only another thing worse you could 
say to your wife, and you ’d better hurry up and get 
that said.' 

'I tell you, I 'm sorry/ He got up from his chair now, 
and looked at her, mumbling something about 'going too 
far/ 

'Yes, and I 'm sorry too,' she said bitterly. 'I didn't 
think you 'd got a nasty thing like that in your head to 
say. Oh, I know it slipped out, and now you wish it 
hadn't. But it oughtn’t to have been there to slip out. 
That 's what hurts me.’ 

' Well, after all, you 've as good as called me a miser — or 
at any rate, a mean devil — half a dozen times to-night/ he 
told her, but not with much confidence. 

'Oh! — that 's different — and you know it is.' 

'1 don't see that. Still, if you think so, all I can say, 
•Edie, is — I 'm sorry.' 

But before he had finished, she had gone, slamming the 
4 oor contemptuously behind her. A few seconds later, she 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 335 

was outside the house. Mr. Smeeth returned wretchedly 
to his chair by the fire. There was nothing he disliked 
more than a quarrel with his wife, and this looked like 
being a particularly bad one. That remark of his would, 
he knew, take some living down. If she had been a woman 
who never took a drink at all, there would have been 
nothing in that remark; but she liked a drink or two, 
especially in company, and was liable at times to get 
flushed and excited, as she well knew herself; and if he had 
thought for months, he could not have said a thing that 
would have hurt her more. He was still sorry that he had 
said it, though there was one part of him that could not 
help enjoying the fact that the shot had told so well. ‘That 
got home on her all right, didn’t it?’ it chuckled, even 
while the rest of him, the part that loved Mrs. Smeeth and 
was her willing slave, grieved and repented. Mr. Smeeth 
did not often swear, but now he called Fred Mitty, under 
his breath, every foul name at his command. That earlier 
argument would not have taken such a bad turn if it had 
not been for Mitty. They had had these little squabbles 
about money before, like most couples, he imagined, one of 
whom is nearly always a spender and the other a saver. 
This had been a bit more serious than most of their squab- 
bles, if only because the extra money had made her all the 
more eager to spend and had made him all the more 
anxious to begin saving. But Mitty and his wife even 
came into tills part of the quarrel, for the whole thing 
began when he came across that bill from Sorley’s for three 
pounds fifteen, which she had not paid and couldn't pay, 
and Sorley’s off licence and Mr. and Mrs. Swilling Mitty and 
their bright pals had been responsible for that bill. He had 
not seen what they had had because on both occasions, 
being duly warned, he had taken himself off, once to 
hear The Messiah , and the other time to play whist with 
Saunders, and had taken care each time, being a peaceable 
man, to arrive back home as late as possible, when Mitty 
and Co. were no longer there. He didn’t believe for a 
moment that his wife was so tremendously fond of the 
Mitty lot as all that, but just because he had grumbled at 
first and been a bit heavy-handed about them, she had 
kept it up, out of devilment and to show her independence. 
She was like that, if you took the wrong line with her, and 



336 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

he had admitted to himself for a week or two now that, if 
it was peace and quietness he wanted and not a tussle to 
decide who was master, he had certainly taken the wrong 
line. 

After brooding over it all for about a quarter of an hour, 
he felt so uncomfortable that if his wife had gone anywhere 
else but the Mittys’, he would have gone after her, to call 
for her and then to try and make it up on the way home. 
But he had his pride, and it refused to allow him to call for 
her at the Mittys*. He tried to dismiss the whole wretched 
business. He lit his pipe and picked up the evening paper. 
There was nothing in it he wanted to read and had not 
read before. He tried the wireless, and the first station 
plunged him into the middle of a talk on modern sculpture 
by a young gentleman who was apparently very tired. 
Finding no satisfaction in him, Mr. Smeeth went over to 
the other station, which was running a sort of pierrot 
show. The pierrots themselves seemed to be enjoying 
themselves immensely and so did their audience, who 
laughed and clapped unceasingly, but Mr. Smeeth merely 
felt rather out of it and thought the jokes not good enough 
for all that laughing and the songs not worth all that 
applause. 'Overdoing it/ he muttered darkly at the loud 
speaker, which replied by bombarding him with more rinny 
laughter and applause. But he was the master; he had 
only to make a little movement and the pierrots and their 
cackling friends were banished at once, simply hurled into 
silence; and now he made this little movement, and the 
loud speaker was at once emptied of sound, nothing more 
than a bit of a horn. He had a book from the Public 
Library somewhere about, and now, in despair, he found it 
and began reading. It was My Singing Years by the great 
soprano, Madame Regina Salisbury, whom he had once 
heard in an oratorio years ago, and the young woman at 
the Library had told him it was a most interesting book, on 
the word of her sister, who was taking singing lessons and 
had two or three professional engagements. But so far it 
had not appealed to him very much. As a matter of fact, 
he was a reluctant and unenterprising reader, one of those 
people who hold their books almost at arm's length and 
examine them in a very guarded manner, as if at any 
moment a sentence might explode with a loud report; and 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 337 

he had probably returned more books half-read than any 
other member of the local Public Library. Nevertheless, 
he liked to have a Library book about, and to be discovered 
reading it. 

He was discovered now. Edna came in, pulling off her 
close-fitting little hat, and fussy and breathless, as usual. 
In a few minutes, she would swing completely round, be- 
coming slack, indifferent, languid, as if the house bored her. 
Mr. Smeeth knew this, and it irritated him, though he was 
very fond of the girl. 

'Where 's mother? ' 

‘Your mother 's out/ 

'Where 's she gone to? She said she wasn't going out 
to-night ! ' 

'The question is, not where she's gone to, but where 
you 've been to,' he said, rather severely, looking at her 
over the top of his eyeglasses. 

Edna did not stop to examine the logic of this, or if she 
did, she did not comment upon it, being still young enough 
to recognize the right of parents to talk in this fashion. 
'Been to the pictures — first house,' she replied. 

‘What, again! I'm surprised you don't go and live 
there. You 've been once this week, haven't you? Yes, I 
thought so. And I suppose you '11 be wanting to go on 
Saturday. That '11 be three times in one week — three 
times. Paid ninepence too, I suppose. And who gave you 
the money to go to-night? ’ 

‘Mother did.' And Edna looked slightly confused. 
Her father, noticing this, jumped at once to the wrong 
conclusion, namely, that Edna had been told to say nothing 
about this extra visit to the pictures to him and had 
suddenly realized what she had done. The truth was, 
however, that Edna was confused, not because she had 
spent another ninepence, but because the money was still 
in her possession, for she had gone to the pictures as the 
guest of one Harry Gibson, Minnie Watson's friend's friend, 
who, in his turn, was supposed, by his parents in their 
turn, to have been attending an evening class in accountancy 
on this particular night. 

Mr. Smeeth nodded grimly and tightened his lips. 
‘There’ll have to be something said about this, Edna. 
When I agreed to let you go and learn this millinery 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


338 

business, I didn't agree to let you go to the pictures every* 
night in the week too.' 

' I don't go every night, and you know very well I don't, 
dad. Some weeks I only go once.' 

'It 's a funny thing I never seem to notice those weeks,' 
said Mr. Smeeth with fine irony. It would have been still 
finer irony if he had stopped to consider that it really was 
not funny at all but quite natural. ' But apart from the 
waste of money, I don’t like all this picture-going. Doing 
you no good at all. Doing you harm. I don't object to 
a girl having her amusement,' he continued, dropping into 
that noble broad-minded tone of voice that all parents, 
schoolmasters, clergymen, and other public moralists have 
at their command. ‘I go to the pictures now and again 
myself. But going to the pictures now and again 's one 
thing, and living for pictures is another thing altogether. 
Teaches you nothing but silliness. Get false ideas into 
your head. Why don't you settle down with a book?' 
He held out his own book. 'Do a bit of quiet reading. 
Amuse yourself and learn something about the world at 
the same time. Take this book 1 'm reading, f'r’instance 
— My Singing Years by Madame Regina Salisbury — this 
is a book that tells you something worth knowing, ah about 
the — er — musical career.' 

'I read a book last week,' Edna announced. 

‘Yes, and been to the pictures three times since then,' 
said her father, who was determined to have his grievance. 

' Too much going out and amusing yourself altogether, my 
girl. Why, you 're worse than George was at your age. 
It 's my belief you girls are worse than the boys nowadays, 
more set on having amusement, pictures and dances and 
what not. I walked from the tram to-night with Mr. 
Gibson, who lives in the comer house at the bottom of the 
next street, and he was telling me that his son — I forget his 
name, but he's about your age, perhaps a year or so 
older ' 

4 Do you mean Harry Gibson? ' asked Edna. 

' Is it Harry? Yes, I think it is. Well, Mr. Gibson was 
'telling me that this boy of his is attending three evening 
classes a week — accountancy, book-keeping, and something 
else — three evening classes. That boy means to get on 
and be somebody in the world. He 's not wasting all his 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 339 

time, he *s using it to some purpose. I 'm not saying that 
you ought to go to evening classes * 

Here he broke off because he noticed that a mysterious 
smile that had been hovering for the last minute now seemed 
to have definitely settled on Edna’s face. This smile made 
him angry, or rather gave him an excuse for exploding the 
anger that had been waiting inside him. ‘And for good- 
ness’ sake, Edna, take that silly grin off your face when 
I ’m trying to talk sense to you,’ he shouted, making her 
jump. * You ’re not at the pictures now. You 're nothing 
but a great silly baby.’ 

‘What have I done now? ’ she began indignantly. 

‘Any more of that impudence from you,' Mr. Smeeth 
shouted at her, glaring. But there was no more of that 
impudence, which suddenly melted to tear$. Edna, not 
a strong character at any time and now completely taken 
aback by her father’s sudden rage, hastily left the room, 
whimpering. 

Mr. Smeeth spent the next few minutes telling himself all 
the things that were wrong with his daughter and that 
justified any man getting angry with her now and then. 
He worked hard, but he did not succeed in convincing 
himself. He put away My Singing Years and turned the 
wireless on again. At half-past ten, George came in, got 
a grunt or two from his father (who was, in truth, afraid of 
talking), retired to the kitchen in search of food, and then 
went to bed. At eleven, Mrs. Smeeth returned. 

‘ Have you had anything to eat ? ’ she asked. Sometimes 
he had a little snack just before going to bed. 

He shook his head. 

‘ Can I get you something ? ’ she inquired politely. 

He knew now that he was in for a serious quarrel. Mrs. 
Smeeth easily lost her temper and squabbled, but she 
recovered it with equal swiftness and ease. If she had 
marched in and called him a few names and looked as if 
she was about to throw something at him, he would have 
known that the whole thing could have been settled before 
they went to sleep. But when Mrs. Smeeth was quietly 
polite to him, it meant that for once she had really hardened 
her heart. She would now turn herself into a very efficient 
housewife. Nothing would be allowed to go wrong; every 
meal would be on the table at the proper time and every 
11938 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


340 

dish done to a turn; he would not be given the slightest 
chance to grumble. But as a wife, a real wife, she would 
cease to exist. Not a smile, not a friendly glance, would 
come his way; and they would be estranged for days, 
perhaps weeks. 

‘No, thanks. I don't want anything. Don't feel like 
it/ Which was true enough ; but he hoped it would suggest 
that he was not very well. She remained quite stony, 
however. 

'Both the children in? 1 she asked. 

'Look here, Edie/ he began desperately, 'don't be silly.' 

'I 'm not silly. I 'm going to bed now.* And off she 
went. 

He was in for it now, days of it, perhaps weeks of it; 
and in order to get out of it, not only would he have to 
apologize at great length, but he would probably have to 
buy something as well, in short to spend more money. 
Yet the root of the whole trouble was that too much money 
was being spent already. He wished he had never set eyes 
on Sorley's miserable bill. He wished he had gone out and 
paid it without a word. He wished — 4 Oh damn and blast 1 ' 
he cried, and in his sudden spasm oi fury, he screwed up his 
face so hard and shook his head so violently that his eye- 
glasses fell off and he spent several minutes groping about 
the black wool rug before he could find them. Oh — a 
miserable evening 1 


II 

Between Thursday evening, when hostilities began, and 
Saturday morning, Mr. Smeeth had tried unsuccessfully 
once or twice to make his peace and to replace this strange 
polite woman by his real wife. On Saturday morning, he 
determined to do no more; she could have her sulk, if she 
wanted it; he would simply make the best of his position 
as a sort of super-lodger. He trotted down Chaucer Road, 
on his way to the tram, hardening his heart. The morn- 
ing, which already had a companionable Saturday look 
about it, smiled upon him, if only faintly. For a day in 
late January, it was beginning well; no fog, snow or rain; 
but a slight sparkle and nip of frost and the early ghost of 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 341 

a sun somewhere above. Mr. Smceth was very fond of 
Saturday; he liked the morning in the office (he always had 
a pipe at about half-past eleven, unless he was very busy), 
and he liked the afternoon out of the office. It was diffi- 
cult for him to forget that his wife had quarrelled with him, 
but he hardened his heart and did his best to forget. Un- 
fortunately — as he knew only too well, for he had said it 
often enough — it never rains but it pours. This treacher- 
ous Saturday was destined to give him a series of shocks, 
of varying degrees of severity. 

The first, and slightest, of these shocks arrived when he 
walked over to his desk, rubbing his hands as usual and 
exchanging a remark or two with everybody. His ink- 
wells had not been filled up, and no fresh blotting paper 
had been put out on his desk. 

‘ Hello ! * he cried, looking round. * Where 's Stanley ? * 

‘Hasn’t turned up,' replied Turgis. 

'Well, well, well, well,’ said Mr. Smeeth fussily. 'Does 
anybody know what 's happened to him? Is he ill or 
something? ’ 

Nobody knew. Miss Sellers thought he had probably 
caught a cold, because she was sure she had heard him 
sneeze several times while he was copying the letters the 
night before. Turgis said with gloomy satisfaction that 
he had probably been knocked down and run over while 
trying to shadow somebody on his way to the office. 

'I don’t suppose for a minute he has,’ said Mr. Smeeth 
sharply. 'But you needn’t seem so pleased about it, 
Turgis. Not a nice way of saying a thing like that at all. 
I don’t like to hear anybody talking like that in this office. 
Don’t know what has come over you lately, Turgis/ And 
it was true. He hadn’t liked the way Turgis had looked 
and talked for some time now. 

The mystery of Stanley was cleared up when Mr. Der- 
singham, very much the Saturday man in plus fours, 
arrived to go through the letters, for among these was one 
from Stanley’s father, apparently a man of few words, 
who announced that Stanley was needed badly by his 
uncle, just returned to the ironmongering in Homerton, 
where the boy would be nearer home and have a better 
chance of getting on than in Angel Pavement — and sorry 
no better notice given but half fortnight’s wages due could 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


342 

be kept but please send Insurance Card all filled in — Yrs 
truly , Thos. Poole . 

‘That means getting another boy/ said Mr. Dersingham. 
'I *m sorry about that one, too. He was a lazy little devil 
like all of 'em, but he looked rather bright, didn't he? ' 

‘Wasn't a bad boy at all, Mr. Dersingham,' said Mr. 
Smeeth, meditatively. ‘ I 'm sorry he 's left us, too. We 
might get a lot worse. He fancied himself as a budding 
detective, Stanley did — we used to pull his leg about 
shadowing people and all that.* 

‘Did he? A detective, eh? And I never knew that. 
He 'd got that from reading about 'em, you know. I 'm 
fond of a good detective yarn myself. But I never wanted 
to be one when I was a boy. They weren't quite so much 
the thing then, were they? I remember I wanted to be 
an explorer— you know, expeditions across the desert and 
all that sort of thing. All the exploring I 've done lately, 
Smeeth, has been looking for some of those mouldy Jew 
cabinet-making places in back streets in North London. 
Ah — well ! ' And for a moment the large pink face of Mr. 
Dersingham looked clouded, as if he had suddenly dis- 
covered that life was quite different from what he imagined 
it would be when he was in the Fourth at Worrell. 

‘We live and learn, sir, don't we?' said Mr. Smeeth 
vaguely. 

‘Do we? I dunno. People always say we do, don't 
they? But I dunno. I doubt it sometimes, I do, Smeeth, 
honestly,' the other replied, first glancing at Mr. Smeeth 
and then looking out of the window, through which nothing 
could be seen but a ramshackle roof and a few chimney- 
pots beyond. A queer melancholy, quite unlike the proper 
spirit of the office on Saturday morning, invaded the room, 
and for a minute the pair of them were lost in it. 

‘Well, well/ cried Mr. Dersingham with a sudden 
briskness, ‘you 'll have to see about getting another boy. 
I 'm sorry about that, though. That boy might have been 
a useful chap later on. He 's missed a good opening. If 
that other fellow, Turgis, had gone, I don't think I 'd have 
minded very much. How 's he getting on, that fellow? 
I don't see much of him, but I must say I don't like the 
look of him these days. He slouches about, looking like 
nothing on earth. What 's the matter with him? ' 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 343 

f I don’t know, Mr. Dersingham. I ’ve noticed it, too. 
There ’s been something wrong with him lately. He does 
his work, but only after a fashion, and it ’s not a fashion 
I like, I must say. Something on his mind, I should say.' 

'And a thoroughly nasty mind too, by the look of him! 
Well, look here, Smeeth, you ’d better take him on one side 
and have a good talk to him. Tell him I ’m not satisfied 
with him and you 're not satisfied with him, and that if he 
doesn’t buck up pretty soon, he ’ll have to clear out. Tell 
him he ’s a fool to himself, too, with the business growing 
as it is and all sorts of chances coming along for smart 
fellows. You know the kind of thing to say. Threaten 
him with the sack, if you like; I don’t mind. I shouldn’t 
care if I saw the last of the fellow this morning. I never 
did think much of him. Got a Bolshie look about him. 
All right then, Smeeth — see about that, and about getting 
another boy. And I shall be off in about; half an hour or 
so, and Mr. Golspie won’t be in, this morning. So just — 
er — carry on, will you.’ 

Mr. Smeeth was really sorry that Stanley had gone, and 
not merely because it meant getting another boy and show- 
ing him what to do. He realized now that he had liked 
Stanley and would miss that freckled snub nose of his, 
that sandy bullet head, and all the ridiculous detective talk. 
But that was not all. Nobody knew better than Mr. 
Smeeth that office boys come and go, are here to-day and 
gone to-morrow, but nevertheless this sudden departure of 
Stanley troubled him, if only because he disliked change of 
any kind and found himself visited by a vague mistrust, 
a flicker or two of apprehension, whenever it occurred. 
Stanley had become part of the office for him, and now 
Stanley had gone. It was not important, but still, he 
did not like it. 

' If we finish in good time this morning,’ he said to Turgis, 
after he had told them all about Stanley and had handed 
over the copying and posting of the letters to little Poppy 
Sellers, 'I want to have a little talk with you, Turgis. 
You 're not in a great hurry to get away, are you? ’ 

Turgis wasn’t. Indeed, the outside world appeared to 
have lost as much favour with him as the office had. 

It was an easy morning. At twelve, Miss Matfield had 
nothing more to do, and was allowed to go, looking rather 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


344 

more pleased with herself and the world than she usually 
did. Turgis lounged up and gave Miss Sellers a hand 
with the copying, for which he received several grateful 
glances from the brown eyes beneath the fringe. Mr. 
Smeeth, sending out a fragrant drift of Benenden's Own 
Mixture, fussed about and locked up, then gave the letters 
to Poppy and packed her off. 

'Now then/ he said to Turgis, as soon as they were 
alone, 

'Yes, Mr. Smeeth? * replied Turgis mournfully. 

Mr. Smeeth looked at him, and perhaps saw him clearly 
for the first time for weeks. There were dark rings under 
his eyes, and the eyes themselves had a queer reddish 
look, as if their owner was not getting enough sleep. He 
never had much colour, but now he was very pale, and the 
bony ridge of his rather large nose shone as it caught the 
light, as if the skin had been drawn back from it at each side. 
The lad didn't look at all well. Mr. Smeeth, who knew that 
Turgis lived in lodgings and was a lonely sort of chap, felt 
sorry for him. 

'Here, Turgis/ he said, ‘there 's plenty of time. We 'll 
go out and talk there. Can you drink a glass of beer ? ' 

Turgis, pleased and flattered by this invitation, said that 
he could. 

‘Well, we *11 go across the road and have a glass of beer 
there. Do us no harm. Everything 's locked up, I think, 
isn't it? All right, then. We '11 go.' And as they went 
down the stairs, Mr. Smeeth kept up a cheerful clatter of 
talk: ‘I 'll just pop round the corner to Benenden's to get 
some tobacco first. Always get my tobacco there, have 
done for years. His own mixture, y' know — mixes it 
himself. Better than this ounce packet stuff. You get 
it fresh. You don't smoke a pipe, do you? Cigarettes, 
eh ? You ought to try a pipe. Cheaper and a better smoke 
and better for your health, too. I 've tried to get my boy 
George to start a pipe, but he won't drop his cigarettes. 
Gaspers all the time. Too much trouble just to fill and 
light a pipe, that 's it. I wonder how these Kwik-Work 
people are going on? Always seem to be busy enough, 
but I never knew anybody that used their blades. I stick 
to the old-fashioned razor. I 've used the same two for 
twenty years. I call it a silly waste of money buying these 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 345 

safety razor blades. No wonder they give the razors 
away nowadays. They know once you 've got the razor 
you 'll have to keep on buying their blades. That 's the 
catch, you see. Well, just wait a minute. I '11 call on my 
old friend, Mr. Benenden.' 

But he didn't, because his old friend Mr. Benenden was 
not there. Behind the counter was a plump young woman 
with bright ginger hair, and if Cleopatra herself in full 
regalia had been standing there, Mr. Smeeth could not 
have stared at her in greater astonishment. 

'Yes?' said the plump young woman. 

To explain what he wanted in T. Benenden's, when year 
after year he had merely had to put his pouch on the 
counter, was in itself so novel an action that Mr. Smeeth 
found himself at a loss to perform it. ‘But — where 's Mr. 
Benenden?' 

The young woman smiled. ‘You a regular customer 
here?' she asked. 

‘I should think I am,' said Mr. Smeeth. ‘I've been 
coming in here, week in and week out, for Mr. Benenden's 
own mixture for years. It made me jump to see anybody 
else here. What 's happened ? He 's not given it up, has 
he?' 

‘No, he's not given it up,’ she explained. ‘He's in 
hospital. He got knocked down by a car last night in 
Cheapside, and they took him to St. Bartholomew's.' 

‘Well, you surprise me! I'm sorry to hear that. Is he 
bad?' 

‘ We don’t know yet. He didn’t seem so bad last night, 
because he got a message through to my mother and she 
went to see him and he gave her the key here and asked 
if I 'd look after the shop for him, because he knew I 
wasn't doing anything and I 'd worked once in a tobac- 
conist's before — well, tobacconist’s and sweets, it was, 
not like this, y' know — so it didn't sound as if it was bad, 
with him being able to talk and arrange things like that, 
but the doctor told my mother it was worse than it looked, 
for all that, and it might be a nasty long job, and she 's 
going again to-day. I 'm his niece, you see.' 

‘ Poor old chap ! I am sorry about this,' said Mr. Smeeth, 
who was indeed genuinely distressed. 'You must let me 
know how he goes on.' He had to point out to her the tin 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


346 

canister that held T. Benenden’s Own Mixture and had 
even to tell her the price of it. When he rejoined Turgis 
outside, he could talk of nothing else for the next five 
minutes. This one morning, not content with removing 
Stanley from Angel Pavement for ever, had gone and swept 
Benenden out of sight, put a plump young woman with 
ginger hair behind that counter and turned Benenden into 
a mysterious suffering figure in a hospital. Benenden and 
Angel Pavement had been inseparable in his mind for years, 
and now the thought of Benenden not being there, no longer 
waiting, tie-less, behind his dusty counter, gave the whole 
place a queer look. Turgis had been in the shop many a 
time for cigarettes, but, being one of the * packet o' gaspers' 
customers, he could not really claim to be acquainted with 
Benenden. By the time Mr. Smeeth had finished talking 
to him about the tobacconist, the pair of them were in the 
private bar of the White Horse across the road and had two 
glasses of bitter placed in front of them. 

Mr. Smeeth had not been in this bar since that night, 
two or three months before, when Mr. Golspie took him in, 
gave him a double whisky and a cigar, and talked about the 
business. It was still as cosy as ever, but this time it was 
not so quiet. It was entirely dominated by a large man 
with an enormous red face, who roared and spluttered and 
coughed and wheezed very loudly, at his two companions, 
men of ordinary size, who could only make ordinary noises 
back at him. All conversation in the bar was provided 
with a thundering accompaniment by this large man. 
There was no escaping him. 

‘You see, Turgis,' said Mr. Smeeth, ‘I thought I 'd better 
have a little talk to you, because, for one thing, I 've 
been noticing a few little things myself, and for another 
thing, Mr. Dersingham's been saying something to me 
about you. If you remember, I said something when we 
had a little talk a month or two ago/ 

‘I remember that, Mr. Smeeth. When you said they 'd 
been thinking of giving me the push.' 

‘That's right. Well, Mr. Dersingham talked to me 
about you this morning — rather in the same strain, Turgis, 
and I said I'd have a talk to yqu.' 

‘But what have I done wrong?* cried Turgis bitterly. 

' Why *s he always picking on me? I do my work all right. 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 347 

don't I? You Ve never said anything about it to me, Mr. 
Smeeth. Seems to me they want to get rid of me whether 
I 've done anything wrong or not ' 

'Outch-ch-ch-ch,' went the large man. 'Wait a minute, 
Charley, wait a minute, let me tell it. Oh dear, oh dear, 
oh dear, oh dear. 'Ere, this is it. Simmy come up to me, 
that morning, and I 'm standing as I might be 'ere, see — 
and old Simmy — just a minute, Charlie, let me tell it ' 

'This is the point, Turgis,' said Mr. Smeeth earnestly. 
' And, mind you, I 'm talking in a friendly way. Nobody 's 
got anything against you at all. Put that out of your head. 
But as Mr. Dersingham says — you Ve got to buck up. Just 
lately, you Ve not been taking your work in the right spirit 
at all. I know you 're not a lazy chap and I know you can 
do your work all right, but if I hadn't known it, I don't 
mind telling you, I might have come to a wrong conclusion 
just lately. Now, we all have our troubles. I Ve plenty 
of my own, I can tell you,' he continued, With the air of a 
modest hero, 'though you mightn't think; it. That 's be- 
cause I Ve learned not to bring 'em to th$ office with me. 
I 'm old enough and experienced enough not to let my 
troubles interfere with my work. You 're not, and it 's 
nothing to be ashamed of. My opinion is, Turgis — you Ve 
not been feeling up to the mark lately.' 

‘That is so, Mr. Smeeth,’ said Turgis. ‘You're right 
there. I haven't.' 

'Didn't he, Charlie?' roared the large man, drowning 
everybody. ' He did. It 's as true as I 'm standing 'ere. 
Next time you see Simmy, you say to 'im, “What price 
Lady Flatiron at Newbury? " — that 's all. Just say that. 
Laugh! Oh, gord! Outch-ch-ch-ch-ch. ' The enormous 
face was purple now. 

'It 's no business of mine, Turgis,' said Mr. Smeeth in his 
ear, ‘ and I 'm only asking in a friendly spirit. But it 's 
my opinion you 've got yourself into trouble somehow. If 
it isn't that, you 'd better go round and see a doctor. 
Perhaps you 're just not feeling well.' 

* I 'm not feeling so well, Mr. Smeeth, but it isn't that, 
really. It 's just — oh, I dunno — well, you see, Mr. Smeeth, 
it 's a girl. That 's what 's been bothering me just 
lately/ 

‘Oh, that 's it, is it? Ought you to be marrying her 

* M 93* 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


348 

or something of that sort? No? Nothing like that, eh? 
Oh, well, had a bit of a quarrel, eh? ' 

'Yes, in a way/ replied Turgis, guardedly, looking very 
uncomfortable. 

‘Oh, well, don't you let that bother you/ cried Mr. 
Smeeth, astonished to discover that this was nothing bbt 
a lovers' tiff. 1 1 know what it is, of course. You 're talk- 
ing to an old married man now, my boy. I 've got a son 
nearly as old as you. It doesn't matter how you 've 
quarrelled, you don't want to take it as hard as that. Bless 
me! — you '11 be making yourself ill over it.' 

'That 's what I think sometimes/ said Turgis bitterly. 

‘Ridiculous! It '11 soon blow over. And if it doesn't, 
why, go and find another girl who isn't so quarrelsome. I 
can tell you this, if she 's quarrelsome now, she *11 be past 
living with, if you 're not careful, later on. You 're too 
sensitive about it, Turgis — that 's your trouble.' 

Turgis produced a smile that was abject misery itself, the 
tortured ghost of a grin. 

‘No, no, not at all,' the large man shouted. ‘We've 
ten minutes yet. Plenty of time for another. What is it? 
Same again? Three double Scotches, miss. I 'aven't told 
you yet what 'appened the other night, 'ave I? I mean, 
with Jack Pearce and old Joe, down at Staines — oh dear! 
— splooch-ooch-ooch-ooch-ooch ! ’ 

'He seems to be enjoying himself all right,' said Turgis. 
‘I don't know how some of these chaps do it — spending 
money all day, no work, knocking about all the time, and 
not giving a damn for anybody. How do they do it, Mr. 
Smeeth ? ' 

‘Don't ask me,' replied Mr. Smeeth, a trifle irritably, 
as if he too had felt a sudden spasm of envy at the thought 
of this rich careless life, but would not admit it to himself. 

‘ Racing chaps, I suppose. Easy come and easy go — that 's 
their motto. All right while it lasts — but how long does 
it last?' 

• How long does anything last ? ' Turgis muttered. 

‘Now that 's silly talk from a young fellow like you/ said 
Mr. Smeeth. ‘It 's that sort of talk that lets you down 
with everybody. Now listen to me. I believe if you '11 
only smarten yourself up a bit, don't be so gloomy, look as 
if you didn't hate the sight of everybody ' 



349 


MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 

1 1 don't, Mr. Smeeth, honestly I don't.' 

* — and settle down to your work properly, there 's a good 
steady job waiting for you with Twigg and Dersingham. 
As Mr. Dersingham said, only this morning, what with all 
this new business, the firm 'U be growing and expanding, 
and that 'll be just the opportunity for a young fellow like 
yourself.' 

Turgis swallowed desperately. ‘ I 'm not so sure about 
that,' he declared. 

‘What d'you mean?' cried Mr. Smeeth, staring at 
him. 

‘I don't think it's all so rosy as all that. I've been 
thinking it over. All this new business — and as far as I 
can see, it 's about all the business we 're doing — came 
with Mr. Golspie.' He brought out this name with a 
sudden jerk. 

‘Well, what if it did? You 're not telling me anything 
now, Turgis. I know that as well as you do — and better.' 

‘ If he goes, what happens then, Mr. Smeeth? ' 

‘ If he goes? That would depend. A lot might happen, 
or nothing might happen. But, anyhow, Mr. Golspie's 
not going.' 

'I think he is — soon, too.' 

Mr. Smeeth stared at him. Turgis was obviously quite 
serious. ‘ Where did you get that idea from ? ' 

‘ I think he is.' 

‘What 's the good of talking like that! You think he 
is! Why should he now? What's the object? He's 
making plenty of money out of the business, as I know 
better than you do. He 's making a surprising amount, 
for a trade like this — I don't mind telling you. He 'd be a 

fool if he did go, unless, of course — well ' And Mr. 

Smeeth thought of several possibilities, but kept them to 
himself. ‘No, that's silly talk, Turgis. What put that 
into your head?' 

'It isn't silly, Mr. Smeeth,' cried Turgis, goaded into 
saying more than he had ever intended to say. *1 know 
he 's going. At least, I know he 's not staying with the 
firm long. I know he doesn't think much of Mr. Dersing- 
ham either. I know that, too.' 

‘But where have you got all this from?' Mr. Smeeth 
was more angry than alarmed. ‘This is the first I 've 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


350 

heard of it. How did you learn it? You 're not trying to 
be funny, are you ? ' 

‘Well/ roared the large man. ‘Get a move on, eh? 
You coming to eat with me, Charlie? That 's right. See 
you Monday, Tom, eh? Course I 'll be there. You 
betcher life, boy! Wouldn't miss it. Am I what? Oh — 
you wicked feller, Tom, you wicked feller! So long, boy. 
Morning, miss. Morning, Sam.' And the silence he left 
behind him was almost startling. 

In this silence, Mr. Smeeth and Turgis looked at one 
another. Then Turgis turned his eyes elsewhere, but Mr. 
Smeeth continued looking at him. 

‘I don't make head or tail of this, Turgis.' 

Turgis frowned, shut his mouth tight for once, and 
moved uneasily. Finally, he said: ‘I heard — something, 
Mr. Smeeth, that 's all. I can't tell where I heard it or 
anything. I 'm sorry I spoke now.' 

Mr. Smeeth saw that Turgis was terribly in earnest. 
There could be no doubt about that. ‘Do you mean to 
say you won't tell me where you heard it, how you heard 
it, or anything? ' 

*1 'm sorry, Mr. Smeeth. I oughtn’t to have said any- 
thing. I can't tell you any more, honestly I can't. Don't 
mention it to anybody, please, Mr. Smeeth. If you do, 
you might get me into trouble, though I haven't done 
anything really wrong, I haven't, honestly. Only I did 
hear that about Mr. Golspie.' 

‘When was that? You can tell me so much, any- 
how.' 

‘Not long before Christmas, a week or two.' 

'Mr. Golspie was away then, was he? ' 

‘Yes/ Turgis admitted sullenly. ‘It was while he was 
away/ 

‘Then somebody told you while Mr. Golspie was away/ 
said Mr. Smeeth sharply, not taking his eyes off the un- 
happy Turgis for a second. He thought quickly, ‘It 
must have been his daughter. That time when you took 
the money to her. You got talking and then she told you. 
Is that it?' 

Turgis said nothing, but he had no need to, for his face 
replied for him. 'Well, what did she say exactly? ' Mr. 
Smeeth continued, far more concerned now that he knew 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 351 

Mr. Golspie's daughter was the informant. 'Come on, 
Turgis, you might as well tell me now. What did she 
say? * 

'I don't remember any more,' Turgis mumbled miser- 
ably. 'That was all. It was nothing. I oughtn't to 
have said anything. Mr. Smeeth, please don't you say 
anything, please don't, will you? Promise.* 

'All right. I don't suppose there's anything in it. 
I know what these girls are. They 'll say anything. 
Well ' 

'Yes, I must be getting on now,' said Turgis. 'And 
thank you for telling me — you know about what Mr. 
Dersingham said. I 'll do my best, Mr. Smeeth. I 'm a 
bit worried just now, that *s all.' 

As his tram climbed the swarming City Road, Mr. 
Smeeth considered this Golspie gossip. It made him feel 
uneasy, although he was still ready to dismiss it as girls' 
nonsense. It seemed unlikely that Mr. Golspie would 
leave them, but then it seemed unlikely that Stanley 
would be spirited away by an uncle in Homerton and that 
Benenden would be lying in Bart's Hospital. There was 
no connection between these events, as Mr. Smeeth knew 
very well, but the sudden disappearance of Stanley and 
Benenden had left him with a feeling of insecurity. They 
made him realize the fact that things simply happened 
and that he had no control over them, no more than he 
would have if the tram suddenly left the lines and charged 
the nearest shop. In the dark hollows of his mind, appre- 
hension stirred again. He decided to talk all this over 
with his wife, who, perhaps because she was so unreason- 
able, had got something that he had never had, a large 
confidence in life. With all her faults, there was nobody 
like Edie for him at these times, when he felt a bit down in 
the mouth. Then he remembered that they were still not 
on proper speaking terms, and that, in her present state of 
mind, he could no more talk to her about what he felt than 
he could talk to the strange woman sitting in front of him 
in the tram. ' We just would be quarrelling now, wouldn't 
we?' he cried to himself, with that gloomy satisfaction, 
that faint sweetness which comes with the last bitter drop, 
known only to the pessimist. Life could do many dreadful 
things to Herbert Norman Smeeth, but it couldn't take him 



352 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

in. He was one of those people who are always there first, 
who are standing at the grave before the doctor has even 
begun shaking his head 


III 

This treacherous Saturday, however, was still capable 
of giving him another shock, from an unexpected quarter. 
Mrs. Smeeth was out when he arrived home, and he had 
a solitary dinner, with Edna flitting about and trying to 
keep out of his way. After dinner, he smoked his pipe 
and pottered about for half an hour or so, and then, as 
the afternoon sent some gleams of pale sunlight creeping, 
like a returned convalescent, into Chaucer Road, he went 
out for a walk. Fate, which had for once an easy task, 
directed him to Clissold Park, where his shock was awaiting 
him. 

The fifty green acres of Clissold Park are surrounded by 
miles and miles of slates and bricks, chimney-pots and 
paving stones, and so, in the middle of it, placed there 
perhaps as a sign that the round green world of mountains, 
forests, and oceans still exists somewhere, or at least once 
had an existence, there are a number of animals and bright 
birds. If you are a Stoke Newington ratepayer, you have 
only to turn a comer or two to catch the soft shining 
glances of deer, to meditate upon the spectacle of birds so 
fantastically fashioned and coloured that it is impossible 
to believe that both they and North London are equally 
real, that one or the other is not a crazy dream. You 
stand there, a litter of peanut shells and paper bags all 
round you, with a Stoke Newington dinner inside you 
struggling with your digestive juices, and you suddenly 
hear a scream from the jungle and a green and scarlet 
wing from the Orinoco is flashed at you. 

There are links, however, between these two worlds. 
One of them was standing beside Mr. Smeeth, and wore a 
short grey beard and a dusty bowler. ‘ Yus/ he remarked, 
looking at the gorgeous birds, then at Mr. Smeeth, then at 
the birds again, and doing it masterfully, as if to keep both 
the birds and Mr. Smeeth there, ‘yus, I been where them 
things come from. Common as sparrers there, yer might 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 353 

say. Bigger than these, too — yus, and brighter colours on 
'em. Yus, I been where them birds comes from/ 

‘Is that so? * said Mr. Smeeth. ‘And when was this? 
Not lately, I 'll bet.' 

‘And you 'd win, mister. Forty years ago, that was, in 
good old Queen Victoria's time. Ah, yer little devils!' he 
cried, addressing the birds now. ‘ What d'yer think o' that, 
eh? Forty years ago. I left the sea thirty-five years ago, 
mister, but I 'd stopped going to them places five years 
before I left the sea for good an' all. Yus, the last five 
years I was on the North Atlantic run, and you don't see 
any o' them little dazzlers up there — fog and icebergs is 
what you see up there, mister. But I 've seen the time 
when I 've brought them things 'ome, proper old sailor 
style. Yus, I have. If yer don't believe me, ask the 
pleece; they know everything there is to know, isn't that 
so, sergeant ? ' 

Mr. Smeeth discovered that an acquaintance of his, a 
Stoke Newington man and a very good hand at a whist 
drive. Sergeant Gailey, of the local division, had strolled up. 
‘Now then, Mr. Lee, telling lies again! Dear, dear, dear! 
Oh, it 's you, Mr. Smeeth, is it? You 're the victim this 
time.' 

‘That'll do, sergeant,' retorted Mr. Lee amiably, ‘yer 
only giving away your ignorance. Yer've seen nothing 
yet, and I don't think yer ever will now. Good afternoon.' 
And off he toddled. 

‘You know him, don't you, Mr. Smeeth? ' said Sergeant 
Gailey. * Oh, he *s a rum old devil. Keeps a second-hand 
shop — furniture and curios and all that stuff — down by the 
Green. His daughter runs it now, but it 's his shop, and 
he 's better off than you 'd think, that old devil is. Won't 
part with nothing, you know, but his reminiscences and 
good advice. He 's a character.' 

‘When he started, I thought he was going to try and 
cadge a bob,' said Mr. Smeeth, moving away slowly with 
the sergeant. 

‘ He 'd have it all right if you offered it him, though he 
could buy you and me up, Mr. Smeeth, a good many times. 
But how are you getting on, these days? Here, what's 
the name of that boy of yours? ' 

‘ You mean George? ' 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


354 

'That 's right. George Smeeth, Chaucer Road— eh? I 
saw the name a day or two ago, and thought it must be that 
boy of yours. We 're having him up at the North London 
next week, Tuesday, I think/ 

‘At the North London!' Mr. Smeeth stopped, and 
gaped at him. 'Do you mean the Police Court? ' 

‘That's right. Case comes on on Tuesday, I think. 
What, didn't you know?' 

‘No, of course, I didn't know,' cried Mr. Smeeth in 
horrified amazement. 'Do you mean — my boy George?' 

'Here, steady, steady, Mr. Smeeth! We 're not charging 
him. He 's only up as a witness.' 

, Mr. Smeeth breathed again, but he was still puzzled and 
worried, and the sergeant, noticing this, began to explain. 

‘ I don't know why he 's not told you. It 's one of these 
car stealing jobs. We 're always getting 'em now. What 
with cars running over people and then skipping off, and 
cars in these smash-and-grab outfits, and cars being lost 
and pinched — coo! — we get a proper packet of cars! I 
don't know what the Force did in the old horse traffic days. 
'Owever, this is one of the car stealing jobs, and by a bit o' 
luck and judgment, we traced this particular car to that 
garage where your lad 's been working lately. Chap o' the 
name of Barrett runs it, and between you and me, we 've 
had an eye on him for some time. Well, he bought this 
car — a good car, nearly new; I don't remember the make, 
\>ut it was a good car, worth money — for fifteen quid. He 
doesn't deny it. Now we 're taking the line that he bought 
that car knowing it to be stolen, not the property o' the chap 
that offered it to him. It 's our belief he 's done this before, 
and a good many times, too. As I say, we 've had an eye 
on him. If he 's not a wrong 'un, I give it up. Whether 
we '11 get him this time or not, I don’t know. I wasn't on 
the case myself. But that fifteen quid '11 take a bit of ex- 
plaining. They '11 be saying they get cars given 'em soon/ 

‘But where does George come in? ' said Mr. Smeeth, who 
did not care what happened in the car-stealing world, but 
cared a great deal about his son. 

‘Oh, that's nothing. He worked there, see, and was 
there when the car went into the garage, and so on. We 've 
nothing against him, of course. He '11 only be asked to say 
what he saw/ 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 355 

'Thank goodness for that! You gave me a fright, I can 
tell you, sergeant. I don’t mean by that, mind you, that 
I thought for a minute my boy ’d be mixed up in anything 
dishonest. I don’t see as much of him as I ought these 
days, and he just goes his own way, but I know the boy ’s 
as straight as you like.’ 

' I ’ll bet he is,’ said Sergeant Gailey, with a certain forced 
heartiness, which he immediately dropped for a more 
serious, cautionary tone. ‘ But, all the same, Mr. Smeeth, 
he ought to have told you, you know. And another thing. 
You get him away from that garage and that chap Barrett. 
He ’s in bad company there. Doesn’t matter if Barrett 
walks out of that court next Tuesday with the case against 
him in bits; never mind about that; you get your boy out 
of it and away from that chap. If we can’t prove it this 
time, we ’ll prove it next time, and there always is a next 
time with those cocky birds. I wouldn’t let & boy of mine 
put his nose in a dump like that.’ 

‘Don’t you worry about that, sergeant,’ cried Mr. Smeeth, 
ais voice trembling with excitement. 'George doesn’t 
stay there another day. I should think not ! And I 'm 
very much obliged to you for telling me, sergeant, very 
much obliged.* 

'That ’s all right, Mr. Smeeth. Thought you ought to 
know. Which way you going now?* 

'Straight home. That’s my way now,’ replied Mr. 
Smeeth, and he went as fast as he could go to Chaucer 
Road. He was still rather alarmed and astonished, for 
police court affairs were remote from his experience and he 
had a horror of them, but he was chiefly indignant, in- 
dignant at the thought that this business, which took 
George to court and might take his employer to gaol, 
should have been kept from him. Did his wife know all 
about it, and had she deliberately hidden it out of his 
sight? He could hear her saying to George, 'Now don’t 
you say a word to your father about this. You know 
what he is.' Yes, something like that. If she really had 
done that, then they would have a quarrel. This was 
serious. My word, what a life! You never knew what 
was happening. 

He arrived home to find his wife still absent and Edna 
and her friend, Minnie Watson, screaming with laughter 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


356 

in the dining-room. 'Just a minute, Edna, I want you/ 
he said sternly. She followed him into the other room. 

'Where 's George? ' 

*1 don't know, dad. Working, I suppose, down at the 
garage. What 's the matter?' 

' Did you know anything about this police court 
business? ' 

Edna stared at him, her chocolate-stained mouth open. 

' What police court business ? What are you talking about, 
dad. Has it something to do with George?' 

'Never mind about that. You don't know anything 
about it, eh?' It certainly didn't look as if she did, but 
Mr. Smeeth told himself wearily that you could never tell, . 
not with children like these, such a strange secretive 
lot. 'All right, it doesn't matter. Where is this garage? 
You can tell me that, I suppose? ' 

She gave him precise directions, and ten minutes later 
he was there, confronting a queer George in greasy overalls, 
who was doing something incomprehensible to the inside 
of a car. He was probably astonished to see his father, 
but he only raised his eyebrows and grinned. George had 
ceased for some time to show any signs of surprise. 

Telling himself that this was his son, who had been a 
child only yesterday, Mr. Smeeth looked sternly at him, 
and summoning all the forces of parental authority, he 
said curtly: 'Just clean yourself up and get your hat and 
coat on, George.' 

'What d'you mean, dad? What's up? Anything 
wrong at home? ' 

'No, there isn't, but just do what I tell you.' 

'Well, I don't understand.* 

' Oh, come outside if you 're going to argue about it,' 
said Mr. Smeeth impatiently, and led the way out into the 
street. 'It *s the police court business. I 've just heard 
all about it.' 

' Oh — I see,' said George slowly. 

' I 'm glad you do see. I 'd like to have seen a bit 
earlier/ said his father bitterly. 'Why' didn't you tell me? 
Have to have a police sergeant telling me what 's happening 
to my own son 1 ' 

‘Well, you needn't go at me, dad. I 've done nothing, 
and they '11 tell you I haven't.’ 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 357 

‘ I know all about that. And you 're not going to do 
anything either. That 's why I came round. You 're 
finishing here now, George. I was warned not to let you 
stop on — though I didn't need any warning. I 'm not 
going to have you mixed up with this sort of business. 
So you can just tell them you 're finishing now, this 
minute.' 

'Oh, I can’t do that, dad. We 're busy.' 

'I don't care how busy you are, George. You've got 
to sto£.' 

'Oh, all right — if you feel like that about it. But look 
here, dad, I must finish that job I 'm doing now/ 

‘ How long will that take you ? ' 

'Ten minutes. Quarter of an hour. Shouldn't be 
longer.' 

'All right,' said Mr. Smeeth grimly, 'I'll wait.' And 
he waited twenty minutes; but at the end of that time, 
George came out, washed and brushed and without his 
overalls. 

'I might have lost the week's money, walking out like 
that/ he told his father, 'but they paid up — like good 
sports.' 

‘Who are "they"?' 

'There's another chap running this besides Barrett, 
a chap called McGrath — proper motor mechanic, he is/ 

'And is he a wrong 'un, too?' 

'Not more than most. McGrath *s all right.' 

'Tell me this, George,' said Mr. Smeeth, halting and 
looking very earnestly at his son, 'did your mother know 
anything about this police court business? ' 

'Course she didn't, dad. I wasn't going to tell her / 

'I see/ said Mr. Smeeth, relieved to find there had 
been no general conspiracy. 'But why didn't you tell 
me , boy? I can't understand you keeping a thing like 
this to yourself/ 

They were walking on again now. ‘Oh, I didn't want 
to bother you about it,’ replied George coolly. 'I knew 
there 'd be a lot of gassing and fussing if I did. And there 
was nothing to get excited about. I hadn't done anything. 
They weren't running me in, were they ? ' 

It was incredible. Mr. Smeeth gave it up. Here was 
this boy of his, who had been playing with clockwork 



358 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

trains on the floor only the day before yesterday, so to 
speak, and now he could talk in this strain, as cool as you 
please, as if he was Sergeant Gailey or somebody! Mr, 
Smeeth waited a minute or two, then said very quietly: 
'About that car, George — did you know it was stolen?* 

George grinned; no wincing, shrinking, anything of that 
kind; just a plain grin. 'I didn’t know , but I had a few 
ideas of my own about it. And about one or two others, 
too.* 

'Do you mean to tell me that you *d a good idea of what 
was going on there and you didn’t do anything about it? ’ 
Mr. Smeeth was shocked and astounded. 

'What could I do about it, dad? If I ’d been dragged 
into it, that would have been different. But they didn’t 
try. And you needn’t worry — I wouldn’t have had it. 
Buying cars that have been pinched like that is a mug’s 
game, if you ask me. Barrett ’s a fool, though he 's not a 
bad sort, really, and he ’s treated me all right. Doesn't 
know anything about cars though, not like McGrath does. 
I believe he had to take over some of those cars. I saw one 
or two fellows who called to see him, and I didn’t like the 
look of them at all — real toughs, they were. But mind 
you, dad, I don’t know anything about those cars, don’t 
forget that.* 

The boy talked about buying stolen cars as if it was 
simply a little weakness on Barrett’s part, a silly hobby. 
He didn’t seem to be in the least shocked or frightened. 
Mr. Smeeth could not make it out at all. It was just as 
if he had brought up a boy who had suddenly turned into 
an Indian. The boy was all right, really; he had left the 
garage without making a fuss; but, nevertheless, his point 
of view appeared to be whole worlds away from anything 
his father could understand. ‘I must say I don’t like to 
hear you talking like that, George,’ he said. 'Seems to 
me you don’t understand the seriousness of this business. 
It *s criminal, this is, work for the police, and you talk 
about it as if it was a tea party or something. Talk like 
that, and you don’t know where you ’ll land yourself.* 

'That *s all right, dad,’ said George tolerantly. ‘Don’t 
you worry. I can look after myself.' 

'Well, you’re going to do it outside that place now/ 
Mr. Smeeth told him. 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 359 

'Oh, I meant to leave there soon, anyhow/ George 
remarked airily. 

* I should think so ! And the next job you find for your- 
self, I hope, will be in a concern that the police aren't 
interested in. You 'd better tell me something about it, 
first. Easy to get yourself a bad name, y' know, boy, even 
if you don't do anything wrong yourself.' 

George, who seemed to live in a world in which bad 
names didn't count, a world his father didn't know, made 
no reply, but merely whistled softly as he walked along. 
When they arrived home, tea was waiting for them, with 
Mrs. Smeeth sitting behind the teapot. She was surprised 
to see George walk in with his father. Mr. Smeeth gave 
her a look that said, ‘ Quarrel or no quarrel, you 've got to 
recognize that this is serious,' and cut short her inquiries 
by remarking: 'We '11 have a talk about this afterwards, 
mother.' 

As soon as the two children were out of the room, he 
told her what had happened, and she gave; him all her 
attention, realizing at once that this affair transcended 
any quarrel. 

'You did right, dad,' she told him, when he had 
finished. 

'I hope you realize,' he added, not without bitterness, 
' that this means the boy may be out of a job for some time, 
and that means both of them earning nothing. It 's all 
right, of course, but still — we '11 have to be careful.' 

'George '11 soon get something. He always does,' she 
said confidently. 'I shouldn’t wonder if he hasn't got a 
better job in his eye now. You were right to do what you 
did, but you leave him alone now and don't worry. He 'II 
find something.' 

This seemed a good opportunity to tell what had hap- 
pened during the earlier part of this eventful day, with 
special reference to the disturbing rumour about Mr. 
Golspie. But she wouldn't listen. She turned herself 
again into a woman who had quarrelled with him, merely 
listened to a few words with a distant politeness, excused 
herself and then gathered up the tea things in a very grand, 
dignified manner, rather like a duchess visiting a poor 
cottager. Mr. Smeeth was left to smoke his pipe, alone, a 
solitary little figure in a huge, dark, mysterious world of 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


360 

cracking walls and slithering foundations, with echoes and 
rumours of catastrophe in every wind. 


IV 

On Tuesday morning, Mr. Golspie and Mr. Dersingham 
spent more than an hour talking together in the private 
office, and Mr. Smeeth, whose chief duty during that time 
was to examine a number of replies to Twigg and Dersing- 
ham's advertisement for an office boy, found it difficult to 
concentrate his attention upon these rather monotonous 
letters, all in round handwriting that began well, but 
always wobbled towards the end. He was curious to know 
what was happening in the private office. Now and again 
he had heard voices raised, and once the door had opened, 
so that Mr. Golspie's booming tones had come flying out 
into the general office, but the next minute the door had 
been closed again. Just after half-past eleven, the bell in 
the private office rang dramatically. Miss Sellers, now the 
junior, answered it, and came back to say: ‘Mr. Smeeth, 
Mr. Dersingham wants to see you.' 

The private office was filled with cigar and cigarette 
smoke, and Mr. Golspie, who stood in front of the fire, his 
legs wide apart, clearly dominating the scene. Mr. Dersing- 
ham, sitting at his table, was rather rumpled and flushed 
and obviously not at ease. 

'A-ha!' Mr. Golspie cried, ‘here's Smeeth. He's the 
man. He '11 tidy us up a bit. You know, Smeeth, if I 'd 
been as tidy as you, as good at putting down little figures 
every day, never forgetting 'em, adding 'em up, I 'd have 
been a rich man now.' 

‘ Well, I 'm not a rich man, Mr. Golspie,' said Mr. Smeeth, 
smiling nervously. 

‘No, but I didn't say — if I could do that and nothing 
else, d' you follow me ? What I meant was, if I could do 
what you do, •plus what I can already do, I’d be a very 
rich man now, and you wouldn't find me in a dust-bin, eh? 
Now if you want to make money, Dersingham, really make 
money, pile up a big fortune, you 've only to be like me and 
like Smeeth here both together, two in one. Quite simple.' 

Mr. Dersingham nodded vaguely. He was not interested 



MR. SMEETK IS WORRIED 361 

in this talk and did not like the sound of it, for Mr. Golspie’s 
voice had dropped into a jeering tone. He caught Mr. 
Smeeth’s eye, and then began: ’Look here, Smeeth, Mr. 
Golspie and I have come to a new arrangement. I ’ll 
just explain it ' 

'Oh, I ’ll explain it,' Mr. Golspie broke in roughly. 'It ’s 
simple enough. Up to now, I ’ve been drawing com- 
mission on all this Baltic stuff as soon as it ’s delivered to 
your customers, haven’t I ? That ’s right. Well, that ’s 
too slow for me. I don’t want to have to wait for my 
money like that. Some of these new orders are spread 
over months.’ 

‘Yes, and don’t forget how long we ’ll have to wait for 
our money, Golspie,’ said Mr. Dersingham, 'or rather, I ’ll 
have to wait for mine.' 

'Quite so, sir/ said Mr. Smeeth, who knew how long it 
took to get accounts settled better than they did. 

‘That’s up to you,’ Mr. Golspie replied, in his hearty 
brutal way. 'I don’t want to point out again that if it 
hadn’t been for me there ’d have been no orders and no 
money to come in, whether it comes in this year or next.' 

‘Yes, yes, that’s all right, Golspie. I agree. You 
needn't harp on it, needn’t rub it in.' 

' Rub it in 1 * Golspie laughed. ‘You 're talking now as 
if you were sore somewhere. There 's nothing to rub in 
but a lot of good new business. Anyhow, Smeeth, this is 
the point. I can’t wait now for all this big lot of orders to 
be delivered. I want my commission on the orders as they 
stand. They 've gone through ; the stuff 's on the other side 
all right, as you know; and your people are here all right; 
so I want my cut now. I 'm not as good as you at figures, 
but that 's what I make it, right up to date.’ He handed 
over the slip of paper. 'That 's a rough total, of course/ 

It may have been a rough total, but what leaped to Mr. 
Smeeth’s eyes was the fact that it was a surprisingly large 
total. 

‘Pretty big, eh? Bigger than you thought, eh? That 
shows you the business that ’s come into this office just 
lately/ 

‘It does, Mr. Golspie,’ said Smeeth, glancing down at the 
figure again. 

'Yes, that’s true.’ Mr. Dersingham's face cleared at 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


362 

the thought. ‘Jolly good. Of course, it 's — what-is-it? — 
phenomenal — a sudden rush, y' know, because they've 
been booking this stuff of yours ahead as fast as they 
can.' 

‘Don't blame 'em,' said Mr. Golspie, looking at his cigar. 

‘ You want me to check this, I suppose? ' said Mr. Smeeth, 
glancing from one to the other. 

Mr. Golspie yawned. ‘That 's it. When can you have 
it done, with the figures right bang up to date, Smeeth? 
By to-morrow morning, eh? All right. And you'll see 
how you can arrange the payment, Dersingham, eh? Yes, 
yes, I know how it is — you told me — but if you can split 
it into three, say, and let me have the first cheque this 
week and the other two as soon as you can, that '11 do 
me. I '11 leave you to work it out. I '11 be looking in 
this afternoon.' 

They said nothing until they heard the outer door close 
behind him and his footsteps die away on the landing. 
They seemed to be in a much larger room now. Mr. 
Dersingham himself was much larger. ‘Get a chair, 
Smeeth,' he said, and lit another cigarette. They looked 
at one another through the sudden spurt of smoke from it. 

Mr. Dersingham gave a short laugh. ‘Friend Golspie's 
putting the screw on this morning. My God! Smeeth — 
I '11 tell you candidly — and this is very much between our- 
selves, you understand — that chap 's getting on my nerves. 
He 's such a damned outsider, he really is. He 's brought 
all this business here, it 's true, but — my God! — he doesn't 
let you forget it either. If we hadn't been in such a rotten 
bad way before he came, well — I don't know — I think I 'd 
have told him to take his stuff somewhere else. Don't 
repeat a word of this, Smeeth, for the love of Mike! But 
that 's just how I feel, and I must let steam off for a minute. 
He gets worse. Talk about rough riding, or whatever they 
call it! He 's the complete bouncing bounder. Business 
may be business, but give me a gentleman to deal with in 
it, every time. Friend of mine, Major Trape — we were at 
Worrell together — met the chap at my house, just after he 
came and I asked him to dinner, the first and the last time, 
and Trape summed him up after half an hour, and several 
times since he 's said to me that he wouldn't have a chap 
like that working with him, sharing the same office, not 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 363 

if he brought a quarter of a million pounds' worth of 
business in his pocket. He's getting worse, too. Ouf!' 

'Well, Mr. Dersingham, you 've got to meet all kinds in 
business, haven't you?' said Mr. Smeeth, astonished at 
this outburst. 

'Looks like it,' replied Mr. Dersingham bitterly. He 
remained silent for a minute, and his face gradually cleared. 
‘ Still, there 's no doubt we 're doing the business. Golspie's 
total — and I don't suppose it 's far out, even though it is 
rough — surprised me, and, of course, he 's drawn a fair 
amount of commission, on the actual deliveries here, already, 
hasn't he?' 

' I suppose this new arrangement 's all right,' said Mr. 
Smeeth dubiously. 

' If you mean it 's a damned nuisance, I agree with 
you, Smeeth. It 's that all right. Look wh$Lt we 've got 
to pay him, and he wants it all these next two or three 
weeks — says he 's a lot of old debts to meet, though God 
knows where they are. That 's what I want to talk to 
you about. We '11 have to go into this pretty carefully. 
I don't know how much you expect to get in these next two 
weeks, but I imagine we '11 have to ask the bank to help 
us out. That '11 be all right, of course, because I can 
explain to Townley there how we stand.' 

Mr. Smeeth nodded. ' Well, I suppose it 's all right, sir,' 
he said once more, still dubiously. 

‘What do you mean, Smeeth?' Mr. Dersingham was 
impatient. 

‘Well,' he hesitated, ‘I don't quite know. I'm just 
wondering if it 's all right.' 

‘Oh, don't keep saying that,' cried Dersingham angrily. 
' Of course it 's all right. I 'm not a fool. It 's a nuisance, 
and I wouldn't do it if I could help it, but it 's all right. 
Plenty of fellows who work on commission have this 
arrangement and get their money as soon as the order 
goes through.' 

‘ I suppose they do, Mr. Dersingham. But you 're think- 
ing of ordinary travellers, aren't you, sir, chaps who just 
get a very small commission, not like this? ' 

‘No, I 'm not. I 'm thinking of other fellows who — 
er — work in a big way,' said Mr. Dersingham, rather 
vaguely. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


364 

‘Suppose Mr. Golspie leaves us? I can’t help thinking 
about that, you know, sir.' 

‘Why should he? My hat! — he 's doing well, isn't he? 
He 's making more out of this firm than I am, just now. 
No, I know what you 're thinking, Smeeth, and I know 
what you 're going to say. You mean, there 's nothing 
to prevent him walking over to some other firm in our 
business, if they made it worth his while. Or another 
thing. He might sell out the whole agency — he 's got a 
tight grip on that, y' know, Smeeth ; I know that for a fact 
— for this Baltic stuff to somebody else, and then clear out.' 

‘That 's right, sir. I thought of both those things.' 

‘And so did I, Smeeth. Don’t you worry about that. 
I don't blame you for being cautious — does you credit, 
and I know you 're a good safe chap — but you mustn't 
think I was born yesterday, you know. I don’t pretend 
to be one of these born City men, the real old cunning sharks 
— that 's not my style at all, Smeeth, and if I could afford 
it, I 'd be out of business to-morrow and be in some snug 
little country place — but I 've had some experience and 
I 'm no fool, y ' know. Oh no ! ' he cried confidently to 
Mr. Smeeth and perhaps to the listening gods. ‘ I 've 
thought about that for some time, and this morning, 
when he brought up this commission idea and wanted 
to clear our account at one swoop, for that 's what it 
amounts to — though he 's earned it fairly, y' know, we 
must admit that — I tackled him on those points.' 

‘Oh, I 'm glad about that, Mr. Dersingham,' said Mr. 
Smeeth, greatly relieved. 

‘Yes, and he agreed to meet me half-way. I agree to 
pay this commission over to him as soon as possible, and 
he '11 sign an agreement, promising not to take the agency 
elsewhere and to see that we keep the agency on here if he 
decides to clear out. That 's fair enough, isn't it? You 
can't get away from that. In fact, we stand to gain by 
this new arrangement, don't we? We ’re only paying out, 
a little in advance, what 's due to him, and on the other 
hand, we make the business safe for ourselves. If Golspie 
goes after he 's signed this agreement — and I 'm going over 
to my solicitors this afternoon to nave it drafted out ; we '11 
do it properly — then he leaves us with the new business in 
our hands, and all I can say is, the sooner he goes the better. 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 365 

And I ’ll tell you another thing, Smeeth. When he 's 
signed this agreement, he ’s going to drop some of his little 
blighterish tricks, that nasty jeering tone of his, because 
I ’m not going to put up with it any longer. I shan't 
need to, after this. By George!’ and Mr. Dersingham's 
voice had a triumphant ring now and he tried to look like 
a very crafty man of affairs. 4 1 ’d never thought of that, 
not properly. It didn’t occur to me that, after this, if he 
doesn't like it, he can lump it, if you see what I mean. 
He'll have to change his tune, thank God I' 

'Yes, I see, Mr. Dersingham,’ said Mr. Smeeth slowly. 
'It 's funny he didn't think of that, too, isn’t it? ’ 

1 Oh, he wants his money in his pocket. That 's what 
he 's thinking about. And then he probably imagines I 
like that nice cheerful manner of his, and like to be told 
every day or so that if it hadn’t been for him the firm 
wouldn't be paying its way. I tell you, these loud bounders 
never think what 's going on in other people's minds.’ 

'I shouldn’t think Mr. Golspie cared very much, cer- 
tainly,’ said Mr. Smeeth thoughtfully. ’But I don’t know 
that I quite see him in that light, though you know him 
better than I do, I ’ll admit that, Mr. Dersingham. But — 
I don’t know ' 

'If you don’t mind my saying so, Smeeth,’ said Mr. 
Dersingham, grinning at him, 'there are times when you ’re 
just a bit of an old washerwoman, and 1 'm not sure this 
isn’t one of them. No, no, don't mind that — I know you 're 
a good chap, and I can honestly say I wouldn’t like to run 
this show without you. Now, look here, will you work out 
that total properly, as soon as you can, and let me know 
what we ’re likely to get in these next two weeks, what 
we 've got in hand, and so on, and then we '11 settle the 
whole thing. Right you are.' 

The latter part of this speech was all so friendly that Mr. 
Smeeth could not take offence at the ' bit of an old washer- 
woman.' He left the room feeling that he ought to be 
convinced, and almost ashamed of himself because he 
could not share Mr. Dersingham’s sudden burst of confi- 
dence. The fact remained, though, that he still felt 
dubious. There was something in Mr. Dersingham's tone 
of voice that made him wince. He did not like this easy 
dismissal of Mr. Golspie; there was a catch in it somewhere; 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


366 

and he felt that Mr. Dersingham was taking the wrong line 
with Mr. Golspie. What was it that Turgis had said, 
reporting the daughter? He wondered if he ought to have 
mentioned that, but then quickly dismissed the possibility. 
Mr. Dersingham knew what fie was doing. He talked as 
if he did. Indeed, he talked too much as if he did. Mr. 
Smeeth, with his apprehensive mind, always felt a slight 
alarm when anybody was triumphantly confident. You 
had to be careful. 

He settled down at his desk, with the various books in 
front of him, to work out the exact figures. For the next 
hour he was lost in them, quite happy, at home in this 
familiar little world of unchanging numerals and balancing 
columns, this world in which you had only to have patience 
enough and everything worked out beautifully, perfectly. 


v 

‘And how's Mr. Benenden?' Mr. Smeeth asked. He 
had called in the shop as he returned from lunch on Wednes- 
day, and had found the plump niece still behind the counter 
there. 

She remembered him, and at once smiled at the prospect 
of a little chat and then looked sad because the subject 
would be her stricken uncle. After that, she compromised 
neatly between the two. ' He 's not as well as he might be, 
thank you/ she replied. ‘Now they 've got him in there 
and had a good look at him, they 've found a lot of things 
wrong with him. He never would go to a doctor himself, 
didn't believe in them, he said — you know — silly. No, it 
isn't just with him being knocked down like that, though 
that was bad enough, but they examined him, you see, and 
now they say he 's not in a good way at all. They may have 
to operate.' 

‘ That 's bad, isn't it ? What 's wrong exactly ? * 

'Now I couldn't tell you. You know what they are in 
these hospitals. If they know themselves, they don't let 
on. I went to see him on Sunday, and I told him about 
the shop and who 'd been in and all that. You 're not Mr. 
Bromfield, are you? ' 

' No. My name 's Smeeth/ 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 367 

'Mr. Smeeth. Yes, that 's right. He mentioned you 
as well/ 

'Did he now?' Mr. Smeeth felt all the gratification of 
a person who has been singled out, no matter by whom. 
' Asked if I 'd been in, I suppose, eh ? Well, I wish you 'd 
tell him how sorry I am to hear he 's laid up. Tell him I 
say that Angel Pavement doesn't seem the same place 
without him. And I hope he 's stirring again soon.' 

'Yes, I will.' The plump young woman hesitated a 
moment. 'I'll tell you what, Mr. Smeeth, if you just 
happened to have a spare half-hour this afternoon, perhaps 
you might like to go and see him. It 's visiting day up 
there to-day, you know. Three to four. My mother 's 
going about half-past three, but if you could have a look 
at him, just to give him a word or two and pass the time of 
day, some time before then, just after three, he 'd be ever 
so pleased. But perhaps you 're busy/ 

‘ I don't know/ Mr. Smeeth thought it over, then looked 
at his watch. * I think I will, you know. It wouldn't take 
me long to slip round to Bart's. Where shall I find him? ' 

She gave him elaborate directions. He remembered 
then that he had wanted to have a word with Brown and 
Gorstein, whose place was just off Old Street. He could 
go round to Bart’s first, and then up to Brown and Gor- 
stein's. It did not look like being a very busy afternoon,, 
and he had still three-quarters of an hour in which to clear 
up a few odds and ends of jobs in the office before he 
went. 

At three o'clock he came out into Little Britain, beneath 
the innumerable blue-curtained windows of Bart's new 
building. As he crossed the road, something huge in the 
sky, to the left, caught his eye and made him stop and look 
that way when he reached the other pavement. It was the 
dome of St. Paul's, and never before had he seen it look so* 
massive and majestic; it was almost frightening. He had 
never seen the dome from that distance and that particular 
angle before, and it was as if he was seeing it for the first 
time. He might have been in a strange city. For once 
his sense of wonder was quickened, and after that, through- 
out the afternoon, until he returned to the office, it never 
slept The wide space between the main entrance to the 
hospital and Smithfield Market was filled with carts coming 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


368 

from the market, a very decided smell of meat, and a nar- 
rowing stream of people, mostly women carrying paper bags 
and little bunches of flowers, who were pouring into the 
hospital entrance. It was all very strange to him, for he 
had not been near a hospital for years and had never visited 
one of this size before. It was like walking into a fantastic 
little town, a strange city within the city. He went through 
an archway and found himself in a great courtyard or 
quadrangle with a fountain in it. Here there was all the 
bustle of a market-place, but not of any market-place he 
had ever seen before. Doctors in white coats and bare- 
headed students ran in and out of the many doorways; 
nurses fluttered snowily across the quadrangle; and now 
and then he caught a glimpse of a patient, strapped and 
rigid on a stretcher, being wheeled away to God knows 
where. One passed him close, and he saw a face cut out 
of yellow bone and staring unfathomable eyes. It was 
terrifying. The whole place, this little town of white uni- 
forms and mysterious silent traffic within the roaring city, 
terrified him. He could have sworn that the little pain 
somewhere inside began tick-ticking again; and for a 
moment or two it seemed to him astonishing that he should 
still be one of the uneasy invaders swarming in here, one 
of the workers, eaters, drinkers, smokers, pleasure lovers, 
movers about, from outside. Any day now, he felt, he 
would be on one of those stretchers. 

Somehow it had never occurred to him that he would see 
Benenden actually in bed. He had vaguely imagined a 
hospital and had imagined Benenden in it, but he had really 
thought of him as being still behind a counter, the familiar 
half-length figure, beginning about the second button ol 
the waistcoat and then going on to the old-fashioned high 
collar and stiff front (with no tie), the straggling sandy-grey 
beard and the thick glasses. In all the time he had known 
him, Mr. Smeeth had never once seen Benenden away from 
his counter; and for all he knew to the contrary, Benenden 
might have had no legs at all. Now, as he approached the 
white-enamelled iron bed, he saw less of Benenden than 
ever, but what he did see gave him a shock. It was not 
that Benenden looked very ill (for that matter, he had 
never looked very well), but simply that he looked quite 
different. Mr. Smeeth wanted to laugh. That head of 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 369 

Benenden's above the sheet looked idiotic. It was as if 
Benenden had taken to wild joking. 

‘ Hello, Mr. Benenden. Your niece in the shop suggested 
I might call and see you. How are you feeling now? ' 

The enormous eyes behind the glasses had slowly 
swivelled round, and now there was a slow faint creasing of 
the face that did duty for a smile. 4 Very pleased to see you, 
Mr. Smeeth. Very good of you to call/ This came in 
tiny high explosions of sound, as if Benenden's ordinary 
tones had been raised an octave or two and only allowed to 
emerge in separate little puffs. 

Mr. Smeeth could see that he really was ill. Every 
movement of the face and his speech were so slow, as if 
they had to be thought out first. And though he had 
been away from his shop such a little time, he gave the 
impression that he had been away for years and years, 
had gone round and round the world, had even changed 
his nationality. He did not belong any more to the 
workers and bustlers and movers about. He was now a 
citizen of this inner city. 

'Not a bit/ said Mr. Smeeth, wanting to be cheerful and 
hearty, but not outrageously so, 4 not a bit. I 'm only 
too glad. I 've missed you at the shop. Quite a shock to 
hear what had happened to you. How are you feeling 
then ? ' 

‘Not good, Mr. Smeeth. No, not good. Baddish/ 

‘I 'm sorry to hear that, Mr. Benenden. I suppose that 
accident of yours was a shock to the system, eh ? ' 

‘That was nothing, that wasn’t/ replied Benenden, 
speaking in a slow, oracular fashion. 'They say there's 
all sorts o’ things wrong with me. Heart bad. Kidneys 
bad. Inside all wrong. They don't tell me much. When 
they do, they think they 're teaching me something.' The 
eyes behind the thick glasses seemed to gleam with pride. 
‘ They 're not teaching me anything. I could have told 
'em that, Mr. Smeeth. I could have told 'em that — yes, 
and a bit more — a long time since. I 've known all about 
it for years, years and years.' 

‘You don't say sol' Mr. Smeeth looked concerned. 

'Yes, I 've known it for years. They can't tell me any- 
thing about that heart of mine. It 's rotten. There 's 
many and many a man — and I 've known some of 'em — 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


370 

who 's dropped in the street with a heart not so bad as 
mine. Been missing the beat for years, missing it all over 
the place. Same with the kidneys. They 're rotten, too. 
But, mind you, Mr. Smeeth, it 's not all the kidneys. There 's 
the liver to be taken into consideration. They 're over- 
looking that, so far they are, but I 'm just waiting for 'em 
to come round to my opinion. I 'm not saying anything. 
I 'm just letting 'em find out a few things for themselves. 
One of these days, that young doctor 's going to notice my 
liver and then he 's going to have another surprise. And 
that isn't all, either.' Here the astonishing image, after a 
little effort, produced something like a chuckle. T. Benen- 
den was exiled from his shop and his financial columns and 
his chats with customers, but now he had discovered in his 
ailments and dubious organs a new and absorbing interest, 
and, stretched out there, he saw himself as a romantic and 
-exciting figure. Within sight of death, he was beginning 
life all over again. 

Mr. Smeeth caught a fleeting glimpse of this fact, but he 
was in no mood to appreciate it. The spectacle of Benen- 
den, suddenly transformed from a familiar Angel Pave- 
ment character, and comic at that, to this infirm shadow of 
himself, filled him with dismay and foreboding. Try as he 
might, he could not help believing that he would never see 
T. Benenden behind that counter again. As he listened — 
for Benenden did most of the talking, slowly boasting of the 
severity and complication of his ailments — Mr. Smeeth told 
himself that never again would the tobacconist bring out 
the canister of Benenden's Own Mixture for him. 

Yet there was no real evidence for this. ‘ How is he? ' he 
•asked the nurse who had first shown him the bed. 

'Who? Seventy-five? Oh, getting along all right,' she 
replied briskly. 'We 're operating at the end of this week 
or early next week. He '11 be all right.' 

She sounded confident enough, but Mr. Smeeth did not 
know whether to believe her or not. As he left the hospital, 
a clammy air of dissolution and mortality clung to him. 
Barbican and Golden Lane, through which he passed on 
his way to Old Street and Brown and Gorstein's, spoke to 
him only of decay. It was a curious afternoon, belonging 
to one of those days that are in the very dead heart of 
•winter. The air was chilled and leaden. The sky above 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 371 

the City was a low ceiling of tarnished brass. All the usual 
noises were there, and the trams and carts that went along 
Old Street made as much din as ever, yet it seemed as if 
every sound was besieged by a tremendous thick silence. 
Cold as it was, it was not an afternoon that made a man 
want to move sharply, to hurry about his business; there 
was something about it, something slowed down and muffled 
in the heavy air, the brooding yellowish sky, the stone 
buildings that seemed to be retreating into their native 
rock again, that impelled a man to linger and stare and 
lose himself in shadowy thought. 

Mr. Smeeth found himself doing this, after he had left 
Brown and Gorstein's, and had turned down Bunhill Row 
on his way back to the office. He halted opposite that 
large building boldly labelled The Star Works t and wondered 
what was made there and whether it had anything starry 
about it. Then he turned round, idly, and stared through 
the iron railings at the old graves there. H$ had been this 
way before, many a time, in fact, but he never remembered 
noticing before that the earth of the buryiag-ground was 
high above the street. The railings were fastened into a 
wall between two or three feet high, and the ground of the 
cemetery was as high as the top of this little wall. There 
was something very mournful about the sooty soil, through 
which only a few miserable blades of grass found their 
way. It was very untidy. There were bits of paper there, 
broken twigs, rope ends, squashed cigarettes, dried orange 
peel, and a battered tin that apparently had once contained 
Palm Chocolate Nougat. This dingy litter at the foot of 
the gravestones made him feel sad. It was as if the paper 
and cigarette ends and the empty tin, there in the old 
cemetery, only marked in their shabby fashion the passing 
of a later life, as if the twentieth century was burying itself 
there too, and not even doing it decently. He moved a 
step or two, then stopped near the open space, where there 
is a public path across the burying-ground. He stared at 
the mouldering headstones. Many of them were curiously 
bright, as if their stone were faintly luminous in the gather- 
ing darkness, but it was hard to decipher their lettering. 
One of them, which attracted his attention because it was 
not upright in the ground but leaned over at a very decided 
angle, he found he could read: In Memory of Mr. John 
N93» 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


372 

WiUm . Hill , who died May 26th , /790, in ^ eighteenth year 
of his age . That had been a poor look-out for somebody. 

‘ ' Aving a look at the good old graves, mister ? ' said a 
voice. It belonged to an elderly and shabby idler, one 
of those dreamy and dilapidated men who seem to haunt 
all such places in London, and who will offer to guide 
you, if you are obviously a stranger and well to do, but are 
quite prepared to pour out information for nothing to a 
fellow-citizen. 

‘Yes, just having a look/ said Mr. Smeeth. 

'Ar, there's some pretty work 'ere, if yer know where 
to look for it, mister. I know the Fields well, I do. Some 
big men 's buried 'ere. An' I '11 tell yer one of 'em. Daniel 
Defow 's buried in 'ere, boy, and I could take yer straight 
to the plice. Yers, the grite Daniel Defow.' 

‘ Is that so? Now, let me see, who was he exactly? ' 

"Oo was 'e? Daniel Defow! Yer know Rawbinson 
Crusoe , doncher? Rawbinson Crusoe on the island and 
Man Friday an' all that? Thet 's 'im. Defow — 'e wrote 
that. Cor! — think 'e did! Known all over the world, 
that piece, all over the wide world. Well, 'e 's in 'ere, 
Daniel Defow, and I could take yer straight to the plice. 
Yers, that 's right. Monument, too — ee-rected by the boys 
and girls of England to Daniel Defow 'cos 'e wrote Rawbin- 
son Crusoe — in 'ere. I tell yer, boy, there 's some big men 
in there — what 's left of 'em.' 

Mr. Smeeth nodded and continued to stare idly through 
the railings of Bunhill Fields, where the old nonconformists 
are buried in mouldering eighteenth century elegance, to 
which they had at least conformed in death if not in life; 
and where, among the divines and elders, not only Defoe, 
but also Bunyan and Blake, the two God-haunted men, lie 
in the sooty earth, while their dreams and ecstasies still 
light the world. As Mr. Smeeth stared, something floated 
down, touched the crumbled comer of the nearest head- 
stone, and perished there. A moment later, on the curved 
top of the little wall beside him was a fading white crystal. 
He looked up and saw against the brassy sky a number of 
moving dark spots. He looked down and saw the white 
flakes floating towards the black pavement. In all his life 
he had never been so surprised by the appearance of snow, 
and for one absurd moment he found himself wondering 



MR. SMEETH IS WORRIED 373 

who had made it and who was responsible for tumbling it 
into the City. He hurried away now, and as he went the 
snow came faster and shook down larger and larger flakes 
upon the town. Before he had reached Angel Pavement, 
not only had it whitened every cranny, but it had stolen 
away, behind its soft curtains, half the noises of the City, 
which only roared and hooted now through the white magic 
as if in an uneasy dream. It was so thick that Mr. Smeeth 
was no longer one of ten thousand hurrying little figures, 
but a man alone with the whirling flakes. The snow was 
storming the City and all London. In Twigg and Dersing- 
ham's, they had turned on the lights, but they could still 
see a queer dim scurrying through the windows. Mrs. 
Smeeth, in her little dining-room up at Stoke Newington, 
watched it with delight and remembered her childhood, 
when they had cried, 'Snow, snow faster, White alabaster/ 
Mrs. Dersingham, who had been shopping in Kensington 
High Street, had to shelter from it in a doorway, and was 
wondering if it had caught the children. The Pearsons, 
secure in their warm maisonette in Barkfield Gardens, stood 
at the window for a quarter of an hour, calling one another's 
attention to the size of the flakes, for there had never been 
anything like this in Singapore. Miss Verever, who had 
missed her usual visit to the Italian Riviera, wrote another 
angry little note to her solicitor, because it was he who 
had insisted upon her staying in London. Lena Golspie, in 
Maida Vale, watched it for a minute or two, then switched 
on one of the big shaded lights and curled among the 
cushions, with a magazine, voluptuously, like a sleek blonde 
cat. Mr. Pelumpton was just prevented in time from 
making a bid of twelve and six for a marble clock (out of 
order), and stayed at home, in Mrs. Pelumpton’s way. 
Benenden, having dozed off, never knew it was there. 
For an hour it was unceasing, and all the open spaces on 
the hills, from Hampstead Heath on one side to Wimbledon 
Common on the other, were thickly carpeted, and every- 
thing in the City, except the busier roadways and the 
gutters, was magically muffled and whitened and plumed 
with winter, just as if it had been some old town in a 
fairy-tale. 



CHAPTER X 


THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 
I 

The outward changes in Turgis, already noticed by Miss 
Matfield and Mr. Smeeth, were only tiny scattered hints 
and clues, and by no means in proportion to the changes 
within, for during these last seven weeks, ever since that 
night when Lena Golspie had failed to keep her appoint- 
ment with him, his life had been like a bad dream. There 
are some dreams, trembling on the edge of nightmare, in 
which the dreamer goes rushing frantically through dismal 
reeling phantasmagoria of familiar scenes and places trying 
to find a lost somebody or something. This had been 
Turgis’s real life. He had got up as usual, bolted his 
breakfast and exchanged a word or two with the Pelump- 
tons, hurried down to the Tube, climbed into the City, sent 
and received advice notes, telephoned to this firm and that, 
fed variously in teashops and dining-rooms, looked at news- 
papers, even gone to the pictures, all as usual; but these 
customary activities had merely been a dream within a 
dream, a shadowy routine of existence. His real life had 
been this pursuit of Lena, and so far it had had all the 
urgency and dark bewilderment of a bad dream. 

He had been able to call again at the flat before her 
father had returned, but she had only spent half an hour 
with him and had been vague and shifty in her excuses. 
He had flung away his resentment, had made the most 
abject apologies, and at last had made her promise to 
meet him again. She had kept him waiting twenty 
minutes on this occasion, and when she did come, she only 
turned the evening into a misery. She had been cold, had 
criticized Lis appearance, his manners, and had made him 
jealous. When he had tried to kiss her, she had laughed 
at him and evaded him. Then her father had returned, 
Christmas came and the two of them had Hone to Paris, 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 375 

leaving Turgis to imagine, with a vividness and force that 
brought a curious mingling of pain and pleasure, a host 
of scenes in which Lena went smiling in the arms of rich 
and handsome Frenchmen and Americans. But at least he 
could not see her, and so he was free for a few days to make 
what he could of life by himself. He made nothing of it. 
He could not forget her for a single minute. London was 
a jumble of silly meaningless faces. Before he had met her 
he had spent most of his leisure looking for adventures with 
girls and hardly ever finding them, but now, of course, they 
were offered at every turn, thrust on him, and they had no 
interest at all. He tried once — a girl outside one of the 
smaller picture houses had smiled at him and he had taken 
her in — but it was merely dull and savourless, like trying to 
eat sawdust. After that, he never bothered, living entirely 
in his thought of Lena and in the memory of those two first 
rapturous nights. He could not believe — how should he? 
— that those two nights did not mean as touch, or nearly 
as much, to her as they meant to him, and So he was ready, 
was eager, to see in everything she had done since merely 
so many mysterious feminine moods, a queenly wilfulness 
and waywardness that would gradually be consumed in 
the mounting fires of passion. He knew that this was 
what happened with these wonderful creatures: he had seen 
it happen many a time on the pictures. 

At first he had realized, with wonder and humility, that 
it was all miraculous, that he was nobody in particular with 
nothing very much to offer. But she herself had changed 
that. She had kissed him into being somebody, and now 
he had a great deal to offer, his love, his life. Very soon, 
being a bom lover and romantic, it seemed to him that no 
girl could want more than that. Living over and over 
again as he did that hour or so of passionate embraces and 
kisses, he could look back on what appeared to him a long 
intimacy with her, far removed from any casual encounter 
(for he knew all about them, and this was quite different), 
so that he felt he had a claim, a right, and that when she 
avoided him or in any way challenged that claim, she was 
trying to escape from the very condition of life itself. Thus, 
if it was not wilfulness and waywardness, then it was some- 
thing abominably wicked stirring in her to be regarded as 
a bigoted and militant priest would regard a heresy. None 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


376 

of this, of course, moved on the surface of his mind, but 
it coiled and uncoiled below that surface and obscurely 
determined what did eventually move there or what at last 
came bursting through, exploding beyond thought, into 
action. 

When the Golspies came back, after Christmas, it took 
two imploring letters and a final telephone call (he rang 
up from the nearest call-box to the office during a time 
when Mr. Golspie was safely away from the flat) to induce 
her to agree to another meeting, and even then, after all 
the crescendo of excitement, she never turned up. He was 
left in a hot and salted misery of shame and resentment, 
but he could no more turn his mind away from her than 
he could walk about with his eyes closed. And now all 
London and every familiar way of life were like the flicker- 
ing background of a film, a film in which he pursued 
and she evaded him. He could think of nothing, nobody, 
but Lena. 

The sleep that would not come to him at night hovered 
perilously near him during the morning at the office, when, 
heavy, drowsy, brooding, he would lean forward, chin in 
hand, one elbow on the desk, and leave his work untouched 
until his attention was called to it. He spoke little, and 
hardly let his dull gaze rest for a moment on one of the 
others there. They told one another that he seemed stupid , 
and stupid he was too, in everything that did not concern 
Lena. In what did concern her, he developed a wonderful 
acuteness and foresight. Thus, for example, any telephone 
call from the private office could be overheard at the re- 
ceiver in the general office, if the little switch-board was 
rightly manipulated; and it often happened that the 
Golspies talked over the telephone to one another, usually 
with reference to what one or other of them proposed 
doing during the evening; and Turgis became expert at 
catching these talks while pretending to be at the receiver 
waiting for some number to be given him. He was able, 
too, to work on the least hint that might be dropped in 
Mr. Golspie's casual talk. Then he would wait hours, even 
on cold, sleety nights, in the neighbourhood of 4a Carring- 
ton Villas ; sometimes in time to see her come out, perhaps 
with a young man, perhaps with her father and one of his 
friends, and then to stalk her down the road to the bus or 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 377 

the taxi rank; sometimes late enough to see her returning 
home, to hear her laughter suddenly break the silence. 
Twice he had watched her, with an escort, go into a large 
expensive restaurant, where he could not possibly follow 
her. Once he had been able to get to the same theatre, 
and had sat in the corner of the gallery, looking down at 
her in the stalls. He had often jeered at young Stanley 
and his 'shaddering/ but now, inspired by his jealous 
misery, he suddenly turned himself into a master shadower. 
Icy winds pierced and smote him; his feet ached in the 
slush ; his hands grew numb and his eyes watered ; he caught 
colds that ought to have sent him to bed, but he never 
heeded them and somehow they disappeared; and all this 
discomfort hardly troubled him at the time, for he carried 
a fire inside him, a burning excitement. It was only after- 
wards, when he trailed back to Nathaniel Street, sat in his 
little room pulling off his wet boots, turned and tossed and 
coughed in his bed hour after hour, dragged himself out in 
the leaden mornings, that he suffered in the body. 

His mind, however, lived as it had never lived before, 
knowing exquisite agonies, finding pleasure and pain in- 
extricably confused in these hours of waiting and shadow- 
ing. Sometimes when he was returning to his lodgings, 
cold, tired out, hopeless, or rose to meet another heavy 
blank morning, he would tell himself that he had done with 
it all, and then he might creep through a day or two trying 
to live a life of his own, but everything would seem then so 
dull, so savourless, that he hurried back to Carrington 
Villas, to the waiting and dodging and hurrying round 
corners. He discovered, too, that when he knew where 
Lena was, what she was actually doing, his jealous feelings 
were less strong and sharply-barbed than when he did not 
know where she was and whom she was with : it was bad 
to realize that for the next two or three hours she would be 
dancing with that tall fellow who sometimes brought a 
car, but it was much worse to be miles away from her and 
to know nothing. When he was pursuing her, though only 
in this strange, shadowy fashion, Lena and he alone were 
real, the only real human beings in a city that had been 
turned, with all its winter magnificence of lighted lamps 
and shop windows, golden buses, glittering night signs, and 
shining wet pavements, into an illuminated jungle. When 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


378 

he tried to put her out of his mind, however, there was 
nothing in the whole city that would let him forget. It 
had been tantalizing, maddening enough before he had 
met Lena, when he had gone wandering about the streets 
in an amorous hunger, but now it was a hundred times 
worse. Everything he saw spoke to him of women and 
love. The shops he passed were brilliant with hats and 
clothes that Lena might wear; they showed him her 
stockings and underclothes; they were piled high with her 
entrancing little shoes; they invited him to look at her 
powder-bowls, her lipstick, her scent bottles; there was 
nothing she wore, nothing she touched, they did not thrust 
under their blazing electric lights. The theatres and 
picture houses shouted to him their knowledge of girls and 
love. The hoardings were covered with illustrations, nine 
feet high, of happy romances. The very newspapers, under 
cover of a pretended interest in Palm Beach or feminine 
athletics, gave him day by day photographs of nearly naked 
girls with figures like Lena’s. And in and out of the 
buses, tube trains, theatres, dance-halls, restaurants, tea- 
shops, public-houses, taxis, villas, flats, went boys and 
their sweethearts, girls and their lovers, men and their 
wives, smiling at one another, laughing together, holding 
arms, clasping hands, kissing. Slinking through this 
Venusberg, like a shabby young wolf, he could not forget. 
It never gave him a chance. He had never given himself 
a chance. He had nothing to put in the way, no ambition, 
no interests, no friends ; so far he had asked for little, merely 
food, shelter, and trifling amusement, except love. In his 
heart of hearts he did not want to forget. 

That first phase of unusual smartness, brushed hair, 
clean collars, creased trousers, had passed; he could not 
bother with that any more; if Lena wanted him to be 
smart again, well and good, she could tell him so; but 
meanwhile, he was his old shabby self, indeed shabbier than 
ever. Mr. Dersingham, Mr. Smeeth, Miss Matfield were 
beginning to give him some queer glances at the office. 
Well, they could look; so long as he kept the job at all 
(and that was certainly important), it did not matter to 
him; he was careless of all that. He was careless of most 
things these days. His finances, always difficult, had now 
drifted into a very bad state, and he owed Mrs. Pelumpton 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 379 

a pound or two, and even then he had to cut his ordinary 
expenses down to the lowest level, which meant that he 
had to feed cheaply and scantily. That did not matter 
either, for only now and then did he feel really hungry. 
Mr. Pelumpton, the old fool, had told him several times he 
ought to see a doctor, and even Mrs. Pelumpton was be- 
ginning to ask him if he hadn't a pain anywhere, he looked 
‘that bad/ she said. He told her that he hadn't a pain, 
though this was not true, for very often now he had a sort 
of pain, not easy to describe, but roughly amounting to a 
tender hollowness in his head. He tried one or two things 
at the chemist’s, just to make him sleep, for the nights 
following these vigils were the worst, when he turned and 
tossed and his eyes burned and the hollow place in his head 
enlarged itself ; but these things did not do him much good, 
and what sleep he got, he paid for in the morning, when he 
felt heavy and shivery, so that the scantiest wash and 
shave was a hard drudgery. His work in the office was 
that too, though after Mr. Smeeth had taken him into the 
White Horse , he tried to appear a bit more energetic, for 
he knew very well that if he lost his job, he vy as in a hopeless 
situation. All 4 hese things, however, were only on the 
dream-like fringe of life. What was there in the centre, 
though this was like a dream too, a very different dream, 
dark, urgent, and with a terrible beauty, was his pursuit 
of Lena, the outward Lena who was behaving so strangely 
to him, whom she had welcomed and kissed and held so 
close. Even yet he believed that she was merely teasing 
him, holding him off for a little space, and that soon all 
would be well. 

At last, after seeing her several times in one week, at a 
distance and never once alone, he made a desperate throw 
and spoke to her. It was a queer night, unlike any other 
he had seen during the time he had haunted Maida Vale, 
for during the afternoon, a Wednesday, there had been a 
sudden heavy fall of snow, so sudden, so heavy, that for 
once it had remained as snow and had not changed im- 
mediately into a black slush. The roofs and gardens and 
privet hedges in Carrington Villas were still white with it; 
even the gates and railings here and there were snow- 
lined; and the night was at once curiously light and 
muffled. He did not pay any close attention to these 

* N 93« 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


380 

details, did not consciously observe the brilliance of the 
stars, the unusually solid velvety black of the houses, the 
white-blanketed spaces, the sudden crystal glitter now and 
again, the crunch of the trodden snow as the night crispened ; 
but nevertheless they stole into his consciousness and 
worked obscurely there. He thought of his boyhood, which 
he had not left behind him long, though usually it seemed 
a hundred years away, a faded muddle. Now it returned 
to him vividly, evoked by the unfamiliar sight of the snow. 
He had not had a very happy boyhood, but in this hour, 
when it came back purged of its shame and distresses, it 
seemed magical and the thought of it warmed and melted 
him, so that something suspicious, something grudging, 
something in his mind that matched a certain furtive look 
he had, shook itself free and then vanished. It left him 
feeling confident, eager, a young man in a world full of 
friends. 

Then he saw her coming up the street, the tall fellow by 
her side. He was not sure at first, but then he heard her 
voice. He hurried forward to meet them before they 
could turn in the entrance to 4a, and he contrived it so 
easily that he was able to slow up and then come face to 
face with them before they had reached the gate. He 
stopped, raised his hat, and cried: ' Good evening/ He did 
not know whether to add ‘Miss Golspie’ or ‘Lena/ had no 
time to decide, but felt that something must be added, 
so ended with a mumble that might have been anything. 
His heart knocked painfully. She looked lovelier than ever 
in the mysterious snowy half-light. 

The tall young man stopped at once, raising his hat, too, 
and smiling. 

‘Oh!’ Lena’s soft little cry was charged with meaning; 
there was dismay, irritation, disgust in it. She hesitated 
a moment, threw him a quick frowning glance, then said, 
coldly: 'Oh — good evening/ and at once moved away, 
leaving the tall young man staring after her for a second 
or two. Then he gave Turgis a nod and hurried away. 

Turgis saw them turn in at the gate. He heard the young 
man's short gruff laugh and then an exclamation of some 
sort followed by a little trill from Lena. The door closed 
behind them, and it might have been banged to in his 
face. For several minutes he never moved. Then he 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 381 

slowly walked past the house, and, looking up, saw the 
light in the window above, in that room where she had 
given him supper and danced with him and kissed him. 
For a moment, he thought wildly of marching up there, 
striding in and demanding to know this and that; but he 
knew there was no sense in that, for not only was the tall 
young man there, but also Mr. Golspie himself might be 
there. He crossed the road, turned to look at the lighted 
window again, stared at it until at last it was nothing 
but a vague crimson blur, then walked away, his shoulders 
humped in misery. 

* Yersh,' said Mr. Pelumpton, as he shuffled into the con- 
jugal bedroom, three-quarters of an hour later* ‘ 'e 'sh jusht 
come in, proper blue look on 'im, too. No, I didn't arshk 
'im where 'e 'd been. I like ter get a shivil arnsher when I 
arshksh a man a shivil queshen, I do. “Leave you alone, 
boy/ I shaysh to myshelf. “You go your way an' I go 
mine. Yersh." What you shay, mother?'; 

* I say it 's a pity, too,' replied Mrs. Pelumpton, above the 
bed-clothes. 'Worries me, it does, to see a quiet young 
feller goin' the wrong way like that. 'E *s got a nasty 
broodin' look. And if you want my opinion, 'e 's got 'imself 
into trouble with some girl — one of these flappers, as they 
call 'em. My words, I 'd give 'em flapper if I 'd anything 
to do with 'em ! ' 

'Oh, I dare shay, I dare shay,' said Mr. Pelumpton, with 
philosophic melancholy. ‘ If it 'sh bother yer want, that 'sh 
where to find it, that 'sh my ecshperiensh. Oo, I got a 
narshty pain in my back to-night. It 'sh the cold, yer know.' 


11 

'Is that Mr. Levy?' Turgis cried down the telephone. 
‘ Yes, this is Twigg and Dersingham's. It 's about the next 
delivery — you know, you were asking. Well, I 'm sorry, 
but we can't manage it for Tuesday. No, they say they 
can't do it. I 've been on to them. But they '11 manage 
it for Thursday — yes, the whole lot. Yes, Thursday 
certain, Mr. Levy — you can depend on that. Yes, I '11 
advise you. All right.' 

He put down the receiver and returned to his desk. He 



382 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

was shaking a little. There had been something queer 
about his voice when he had been speaking to Levy. As 
he left the telephone, he had noticed both Miss Matfield 
and little Poppy Sellers glancing curiously at him. Let 
them look, silly fools, and then mind their own business! 
He had come to a sudden decision, and the very thought of 
it made him shake with excitement, though that was not 
very difficult, because he was not feeling at all well. That 
great hollow inside his head was filled now with jagging 
hot wires; his bones ached vaguely; his hands shook a 
little as he wrote; and his face kept twitching, as if it 
disliked the feel of the heavy burning eyes. Yet he did 
not feel the least desire to go to bed or to see a doctor; he 
did not feel ill in the ordinary way at all ; it was only nerves, 
he concluded, just imagination. He had only to sleep 
better and eat more and all would be well. 

His decision was to see Lena and have it out with her 
that very night, if by chance he could find her in the flat. 
He knew that her father would not be there, because when 
he had gone to the telephone to ring up Levy, Mr. Golspie 
had put a call through from the private office, and it had 
been to book a table for two at a restaurant. On this the 
cunning shadower in Turgis pounced at once. Mr. Golspie 
sometimes took his daughter out for the evening, but 
Turgis was certain that he would not trouble to book a 
table for her. He had not sounded like a man who was 
spending the evening with his daughter. If Lena was out, 
then she was out, and Turgis would have to wait, but he 
knew she did not go out every night and this was a chance 
not to be missed. At eight o'clock or just after, when Mr. 
Golspie was well out of the way, sitting down in his West 
End restaurant, he would go to the flat and, if Lena was 
there, he would see her and talk to her in that room of 
theirs again. He would see her, whatever happened. 
Whatever happens , whatever happens — a voice inside him 
said it over and over again as the Friday afternoon, fussy 
and irritable because of its week-end rush of things-that- 
must-be-settled-at-once, dragged on, with the last dripping 
traces of snow fading outside the window. 

‘Finished that copying. Miss Sellers?' said Mr. Smeeth, 
as he began to put away his books. ‘That's the way. 
We '11 have that new boy here on Monday, and then you '11 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 383 

have it easier, eh? You cleared up, Turgis? Did you 
have a word with Ockley and Sons — y* know, I mentioned 
it to you this morning ? ’ 

'Yes, I did, Mr. Smeeth. It ' s all right.* 

‘You *re through then, eh? * 

'All I can do to-night, Mr. Smeeth. One or two things 
I *ve had to leave till to-morrow morning— couldn't help it.* 
‘Quite so,* said Mr. Smeeth, taking out his pipe and 
pouch. ' Well, I don't think there *11 be much fear of you 
not turning up here to-morrow morning, what do you say? 
Pay day, eh, Turgis ? That *s one of the days we don't like 
to miss.* 

Turgis smiled faintly. ' No, I *11 be sure not to miss that, 
Mr. Smeeth. You can count on me for that,' 

' It *s as well we can count on somebody for something 
these days,* Mr. Smeeth remarked jocularly. 'Well, you 
can get away now, Turgis — you, too, Miss Matfield, of 
course — and I *11 see you in the morning.* , 

‘That *s right,' said Turgis. But as he w&s taking down 
his hat and coat, he said to himself, fbr no particular 
reason: ‘How does he know he *11 see me in the morning? 
He doesn't want to be so jolly sure about it.' Then as he 
was putting his overcoat on, he looked across at Smeeth, 
who was now lighting his pipe, and said to himself: 'Old 
Smeethy there, with his eyeglasses and his pipe and his 
nice clean collar every day and his nice home with his wife 
and kids and his walk round to the bank with his seven or 
eight quid a week, he *s all right and he deserves it, for all 
his fussing about, 'cos he *s not a bad old stick. But he *s 
a bit of a dreary devil for all that, and he thinks every- 
thing *s settled the way it is with him, and he knows no 
more really about what *s going on than an old charwoman. 
Still, if I got on a bit and Lena married me and we 'd a nice 
little home the same as his, I *d like to ask him in sometimes 
with his wife and we 'd have a smoke and a drink.' 

And Mr. Smeeth, looking up from his pipe and catching 
Turgis's eye, said to himself : ‘ That lad *s looking bad, my 
words he is, worse than ever to-day. He ought to knock 
off for a day or two, even if we are short-handed. Doesn't 
look after himself, that *s the trouble. And nobody to 
look after him — in lodgings. Bit miserable that. But 
then he 's no responsibilities, no worries, only himself to 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


384 

provide for, and he could have a good life — go to concerts 
and all that — if only he set about it properly. Probably 
doesn't know how to look after himself. I ought to ask 
him up to tea or supper one of these week-ends — be a nice 
change for him — bit of home life. Yes, I 'll do that when 
we 're a bit more settled and Edie 's in a good temper.' 

Thus, with these thoughts buzzing in their heads, they 
looked at one another, almost staring as people stare at 
a familiar word that has suddenly grown strange. Then, 
with a sober nod across the office, they turned away, Turgis 
to the door and Smeeth to his desk. 


hi 

It was fine that night, and in the slight stir of wind there 
was a faint warmth that hurried the black slush into the 
gutters. Once out of the main road, where the bright 
lamps and the passing cars and buses were crazily mirrored 
in the wet stone, Turgis turned into a Maida Vale that was 
quite unlike the one he had seen two nights before, when 
the snow lay thick on the ground. Now it was close, dark, 
and dripping. Carrington Villas was one great gloomy 
drip-drip and it smelt slightly of wet grass. Turgis, shiver- 
ing a little, not with cold, but from excitement, never gave 
these things a thought, but nevertheless he noticed them. 
He noticed everything that night. The least thing, a 
shadow moving on a curtain, a boy's whistle far down the 
road, stood out clearly, rammed itself home. At No. 2 
somebody was playing the piano, and he recognized the very 
piece; he had heard it many a time at the pictures. 

He stood outside the gate. There was a light up there. 
She was in, that was certain. Somebody might be with 
her, but he would have to risk that. He did not care very 
much now if there was somebody there, for he could go 
up and say something. He waited a moment. 

Then, as he waited, he was suddenly visited by an 
impulse to go away, to drop it all then and there and never 
to think about the girl again. He felt for a second as if 
he had only to turn on his heel and walk straight forwards 
until he reached the top of the street, just the top of the 
street, that was all, and he was free and a different kind of 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 385 

fellow, stronger and happier. It was almost as if a voice 
whispered sharply in his ear: ‘Come on. Have done with 
it. Come away, now.* There was a cold emptiness some- 
where in his stomach. He wasn't well. He could easily 
have cried. If that light up there had suddenly vanished 
from the window, he could have turned away without 
regret. The faint crimson glow remained, however, and 
he could not leave it now for a safe but empty world. 

Once again, he passed the broken statue of the little boy 
playing with two large fishes, climbed the steps between the 
two peeling pillars, and carefully rang the bell marked 4a. 
When nobody seemed to hear it, he remembered what had 
happened before, and tried the other bell. The door was 
opened by the enormous woman in the apron. 

‘ Do you know if Miss Golspie 's in, please? ' 

‘Oh, I 'm wearing me feet out for them people!’ cried 
the woman. * Up and down, and every time our own bell 
rings, it *s for them. Miss Golspie, is it ? 1 believe she ’s 

in too, though it 's no business of mine whether she ’s in 
or out or gone to the devil, young man. Would she be 
expecting you coming at all ? ' 

‘ No, she isn’t. Do you know if she 's by herself — I mean, 
is there anybody else there? ’ 

‘I’ll see, I’ll see. I’ll give her a shout. Just come 
inside and close the door gently behind you, so there 's no 
draught in the place, and then I ’ll give her a shout.' And 
the woman went down the hall, climbed a few stairs, and 
gave a shout that soon opened the door above. 'Miss 
Golspie, there 's a young man here, known to you — I 've 
seen him before meself — he wants to know if you 're alone 
up there and can he come up to see you.’ 

‘Yes, I ’m all on my lonesome to-night,' Turgis heard 
Lena cry. ‘Tell him to come up, please, and I won't be 
a minute.’ She sounded as if she was pleased. It was 
wonderful to hear her like that. 

' You' ve to go up and then when you get there, she 
says she won't keep you a minute, meaning you '11 wait 
while she tidies herself and makes herself pretty.' 

‘Thanks very much,' said Turgis fervently, and up he 
went. The door was open and he walked forward, straight 
into the big sitting-room, which he had revisited so many 
times in his imagination these last few weeks that it was 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


386 

quite strange to see waiting quietly there for him, the very 
same room, with the very same piles of bright cushions, the 
same deep sofa thing, the same gramophone, records, books, 
magazines, bottles, fancy boxes, fruit, and glasses all over 
the place, the same two big shaded lamps. He shook to 
see it there, solid, real. He did not sit down, but stood in 
the middle of the room, holding his hat, glancing quickly, 
nervously, at this thing and that. 

'Hel-Jo!' cried Lena gaily in the doorway. Then the 
sound was cut short. He turned to face her. 

'Oh!' she cried, staring at him. ‘It's you/ And her 
face fell, her voice dropped. 

He tried to say something. 

'Do you want to see my father about something?' she 
demanded. 

'No, I don't. I want to see you — Lena.' 

‘ What do you want to see me about ? ' 

‘Oh! — you know, Lena. Everything.' 

She came forward a little now. ‘I don't know. My 
father will be coming back soon — any minute.' 

'He won't/ he told her sullenly. 

' How do you know he won't ? You don't know anything 
about it!' 

‘ I do. I know where he is, and I know he won't be back 
for some time.' 

'Yes, you would \ That's why you're here. You've 
been spying and following me about, haven't you ? Making 
me look a fool! You look a fool too, let me tell you that, 
a nasty fool.' 

'Well, what if I have? I wanted to see you.' 

'Well, I didn't want to see you,' she cried, furious now. 
'And you ought to have known I didn't. You can't take 
a fiint. I told you as plainly as I could I didn't want to 
see you any more.' 

'Lena, why don't you?' 

'Because I don't, and that's why. If I don't want to 
see you, why don't you go away and stop away? I don't 
want you hanging about me and coming slinking in here, 
looking like nothing on earth. Just because I felt sorry 
for you once and hadn't anything much to do and was nice 
to you, do you think I 've got to spend all my time trailing 
round to the pictures with you? ' 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 387 

‘But, Lena, listen * 

‘I tell you, I won't listen. I don't want to hear. If you 
only saw yourself! Go away. I won't listen. I didn't 
want to be rude to you, but you 're so stupid and you just 
make me look silly too.' 

'Lena, please, please, just listen a minute ' 

'Oh, go away, can't you! Fool!' 

'You'll have to listen,' he screamed. He sprang for- 
ward, dropping his hat, and seized both her wrists and held 
them tight. As she struggled to break loose, he poured 
it all out in a wild unbroken rush of short phrases, the 
whole story of his first distant adoration, his desire and his 
passion, all the ecstasies and miseries of his love. As he 
came to the end, his grasp suddenly slackened and she was 
able to free her wrists. She had not listened to him. She 
was in a fury. 

'You damned rotten rotten ' she gasped, fighting for 

breath. Then she flared up into a shriek : ' Keep your filthy 
hands off me,' and she flung her own hands into his face, 
pushing him away. 

Things were snapping inside him now like taut fiddle- 
strings. 'All right, I 'U kiss you for that/ he cried, and 
caught hold of her before she could get away. He was not 
a muscular youth, but he was strong enough now. He 
pressed her body to his and forced a few brief kisses upon 
her before she had a chance to do anything but push and 
wriggle. The feel of her body, the soft cheek burning 
beneath his lips, the scent of her hair, touched a spring 
inside him; all tenderness for her vanished ; his blood leaped 
and sent a murderous cataract roaring in his ears. He still 
held her, but hardly noticed her hands on his face. 

She gave a violent twist, partly freeing herself. 'You 
dirty, filthy pig! ' she cried. ' Let me go. I hate you. If 
you touch me again, I '11 scream and scream until somebody 
comes.' 

He looked at her and then there came, like a flash of 
lightning, the conviction that she was hateful, and some- 
thing broke, and a great blinding tide of anger swept over 
him. Her scream was cut short, for his hands were round 
her soft white throat, pressing and pressing it as he shook 
her savagely. Her head wobbled like a silly mechanical 
doll's. Her mouth was open and her eyes were bulging. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


388 

and so she wasn't even nice to look at any more, but just 
silly and ugly, so silly and ugly that his hands, which had an 
independent life of their own now and were strong and 
masterful, pressed harder than ever. 

A horribly rusty noise came from that open mouth. She 
suddenly went limp, and, as his hands released their grip, 
her eyes closed and she slipped backwards, striking her 
head against the comer of the divan as she fell and then 
rolling over on to the floor, a huddle of clothes and white 
flesh. She made no movement at all, not a twitch, not a 
tremor. He crept forward, his eyes fixed on what could be 
seen of her face, purply-white and still. The whole figure 
was completely motionless. He waited a minute, raising 
his eyes in a slow strained fashion until they took in 
nothing but the shape and colour of a fancy box of cigarettes 
on the little table by the divan. There was a gay picture of 
a Turkish woman on the box. He had had some cigarettes 
from that box; they were very good; they were foreign 
cigarettes; Turkish, of course, but not sold in England; 
foreign words just above the picture of the Turkish woman, 
foreign words. Very slowly his eyes left the box and 
returned to the figure on the floor. Lena. Not a move- 
ment. No, that wasn’t Lena any more; that was a body. 
You couldn't lie there like that unless you were dead. 
Lena was dead. 

He stopped thinking then ; no more thoughts came, not 
one. He picked up his hat and shambled quickly out of 
the room, out of the flat, leaving the door wide open be- 
hind him. When he reached the hall below, somebody 
came out from somewhere, perhaps spoke to him, but he 
took no notice. He left the house. It was better outside, 
in the dark. 


IV 

Down the straight length of Maida Vale, past the de- 
tached villas, past the great blocks of flats that were like 
illuminated fortresses, he moved at a steady pace, never 
lingering, just as if he were a young man who knew exactly 
where he was going and knew exactly how long it would 
take him to get there. But he wasn’t going anywhere; he 
was only moving on, simply leaving that room with the 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 389 

bright cushions and the fancy boxes and the quiet huddle 
of clothes and limbs by the end of the deep sofa. He 
wasn't quite real. He was a young man walking in a film. 
Somebody spoke to him once. It was a big man in a cap 
and mackintosh, and he planted himself squarely in front 
of the dazed Turgis and said, almost angrily: ‘Here, I say, 
how do I find Nugent Terrace?' And when Turgis mut- 
tered that he didn't know, that he was a stranger in that 
district, the big man said that he was a stranger too and 
that everybody he asked was a stranger, that they were all 
bloody strangers. When Turgis was walking on again, he 
kept repeating that — 'all bloody strangers.' He noticed 
things as he went along, though they weren't very real, 
only like the things you see in the background of a film. 
Maida Vale turned itself into Edgware Road, and im- 
mediately became bright and crowded, a gleaming medley 
of shop windows, pubs, picture theatre entrances, hawkers' 
barrows, and pale faces. There was a shop where you 
could get sixpenny packets of gaspers for fivepence. A 
woman was shouting at a pub door; she was drunk. A lot 
of people were waiting to see the pictures, and a fellow with 
a banjo was singing to them. Two Chinamen came out of 
a sweet shop: All These Chocolates Our Own Make. That 
fried fish smelt bad. Two men starting a row, and a 
woman trying to pull one of them away. A good raincoat 
for 25/6. Funny what a lot of these imitation bunches of 
bananas there were, and didn't look a bit like the real ones 
either. That chap standing in the shop doorway was just 
like Smeeth, might be his double. It streamed on and on, 
like a coloured film, a film with heavy bumping bodies and 
real eyes in it. Marble Arch, and some people waiting for 
buses. 

Now, quite suddenly, he felt sick and terribly tired. 
There was nothing left of his body but some tiny aching 
old bones, but his head was enormous and there was more 
screeching and grinding and dull roaring in the great hollow 
inside it than there was among the cars in the road. He 
tried to think. Had he really gone there and done that? 
He had gone to that room so many times in his imagination, 
had so many scenes there, so many vivid encounters with 
Lena, that perhaps this last visit wasn't real either. Had 
he done that? His fingers, closing round ghostly flesh. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


390 

sent a sharp message to say he had done it. Yes, he had. 
Then there was no changing it at all. It was there. As if 
curtains had suddenly parted and been drawn up, he saw 
the room again; he was back in it; a Turkish woman on a 
box of cigarettes, and then — on the floor, not a movement. 
Something inside him, a little wild thing, trapped, mad, 
sent up a scream. Something else muttered over and over 
again that it was an accident, only an accident, a pure 
accident, just an accident, all accidental, simply an accident; 
and then it said that he wasn’t well, not at all well, ill in 
fact, nerves and all that, yes, nerves, quite ill, not healthy, 
not well. The tears came into his eyes as he thought how 
true this was, for lots of people had said that he wasn’t 
well and he knew he wasn’t well. Then a bus came up and 
everybody got on it, so he got on it too, and sat inside. 
The man next to him had a big swelling at the back of his 
neck, and for a moment Turgis was sorry for him, but after 
that he forgot all about him, forgot about all the other 
people in the bus, forgot all about Oxford Street and Regent 
Street that rolled past like a gleaming and glittering frieze. 
He did not notice where the bus was going; he did not care; 
he sank into a sick stupor. 

"Ere, come along,’ said the conductor. * Fares, please.* 

Mechanically, vacantly, Turgis handed him twopence 
and received his ticket. 

Nobody else bothered about him at all. They glanced 
in his direction and then looked indifferently away. Yet 
in a week or two perhaps, they might all of them be talking 
about him. But then he would not be Turgis any more, 
Mrs. Pelumpton's lodger and the railway and shipping 
clerk at Twigg and Dersingham’s; he would be the Maida 
Vale Flat Murderer; and as that, he could set huge machines 
in motion, send men running here and there, men with 
note-books, men with cameras; news editors would men- 
tion him at conferences; sub-editors would rack their brains 
for good headlines for him; reporters would describe his 
little room in Nathaniel Street and interview Mrs. Pelump- 
ton; columns on his 'ill-fated romance* would be com- 
missioned for the Sunday papers; good money would be 
paid for the smallest snapshot of him; every detail of his 
past would be sent roaring through the printing machines; 
men who had known him would boast of it; special con- 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 391 

tributors would comment on his story and his fate for twenty 
guineas a thousand words; scholarly criminologists would 
make a note of his case for future reference; novelists and 
dramatists would see if he could be worked up into anything 
good; millions would talk about him, would denounce him, 
would cry for his execution, would sign petitions, or perhaps 
pray for his soul; if he were set free, ten thousand women 
would be ready to marry him, and any halting sentences 
he could produce about himself would be handsomely paid 
for and conjured into The Story of My Life, announced on 
innumerable placards and hoardings: he would be some- 
body at last — the Maida Vale Flat Murderer. As yet, 
however, he was only a shabby, hollow-eyed youth with a 
vacant look, huddled in a seat that slowly moved round 
Piccadilly Circus, where, against the night sky, commerce 
was clowning it royally in a multi-coloured fantasy of lights. 
Nobody bothered about him yet ; they were, as the big man 
had said, all strangers. 

At the corner of the Strand and Wellington Street, the 
bus turned and then stopped, and there he left it and began 
walking eastward. He had no destination, no plan; his 
mind issued no commands to his body to move, this way 
or that ; his legs simply went on ; while his mind was half 
in a dream and, for the rest, a vague jangle of conflicting 
voices. It was quieter now; less crowded, for he was going 
along Fleet Street, where later, perhaps, the machines would 
pound him into brisk news just as the other machines had 
pulped the tall trees into paper for such news. They were 
waiting, just round the comer, down the dark alleys, these 
machines, ready to pounce on some unhappy morsel of 
humanity. But as yet he was still only Turgis, Mrs. 
Pelumpton’s, Twigg and Dersingham's, and now he drifted 
on, up Ludgate Hill, turning his face towards the old grey 
ghost of St. Paul's, then curving in its shadow round Church 
Yard, up Old Change, down Cheapside, along Milk Street 
and Aldermanbury. It was better here in the City; not so 
much glare and noise, not so many people; it was huge, 
dark, and wettish, like a big cellar, a cave. It made his 
head feel better; and at last he could think a bit, though 
it was like trying to think in a nightmare. His legs were 
taking him somewhere now. There was no sense in it, 
but then there was no sense in anything. Oh, what had 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


392 

he done, what had he done? A street lamp, set queerly 
at the side of a great blank wall, threw its uncertain light 
on to a short curving flight of stone steps. While he 
questioned himself, his feet sought these steps and trod 
them with an ease that suggested familiarity. His hand 
touched the stout little iron post at the top, as it had done 
many and many a time before, for the blank wall belonged 
to Chase & Cohen : Carnival Novelties , and these were the 
steps that prevented Angel Pavement from being a cul- 
de-sac 

Two little yellow lights flickered at him, like a dubious 
pair of eyes, from somewhere down the little street. He 
walked towards them, quite slowly now, as if at last his 
mind was attempting to control his legs. The lights were 
those of a car. They were the feeble headlights of a taxi. 
And above this taxi, there was one lighted window, on the 
first floor, and on the first floor of No. 8. Somebody 
was in the office, Twigg and Dersingham's, at this time, 
ten o'clock. He had to tell himself so very slowly and 
clearly, and he did it while he was standing in front of 
the waiting taxi. 

He put his head round the comer, to look in the driver's 
seat. ‘ I say,' he began, with difficulty as if his voice was 
rusty. * I say ' 

'Hel-lo, hel-lo 1' the driver suddenly shouted, so that 
Turgis jumped back. 'What the hel-lo! You give me a 
start, mate. I must ha* dropped off.' 

'I say,' said Turgis, returning to look at him earnestly, 
'did you bring somebody here? In there, I mean.' 

‘I did,' replied the driver. ‘And I *m waiting for the 
party to come out.' 

' Who was it ? I mean, what was he like ? ' 

The driver pushed forward a wrinkled red face. ‘Now I 
should say — that 's my business. Who d' you think you 
are, young feller? Scotland Yard or what?' 

‘No, but you see, I happened to be passing, you see,' he 
hesitated a moment, 'and, well, I work up there — where 
the light is — in that office, and I wondered who it was.' 

'Your place — like? ' 

'Yes.* Turgis gulped. He felt sick; he was trembling; 
he couldn't talk like this long. ‘ My place, where I work.' 

' I see. Well, matter of fact, there 's two of 'em in there. 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 393 

and I brought 'em here from a restaurant in Greek Street. 
There 's a young lady and a stiffish gent — big moustache. 
That 's who 's in there, mate. Now are you satisfied?' 

‘ Yes — thanks/ 

' 'Ere/ said the driver, after a pause, pushing his face over 
the edge of his door and staring at Turgis, "ere, half a 
minute, boy, what 's the matter? You 're not crying, are 
you? Got the jim-jams, boy, or what? ' 

But Turgis had disappeared into the dark doorway. 


v 

The office door was slightly open, so that a thin pencil of 
light pointed across the landing. Turgis waited a minute, 
staring at it from the shadow. He passed a hand roughly 
over his wet face. Then, summoning all the courage left 
him in the world, he blundered in, almost flinging himself 
into the private office beyond. 

‘Now who the hell are you ? ' roared Mr. Golspie, jumping 
up from his chair at the table. Somebody gave a scream. 
It was Miss Matfield, in the corner. 

‘Lena/ said Turgis, choking over the name. 

‘Well, I *11 be damned! If it isn't What’s-his-name — 
Turgis/ Mr. Golspie glared at him, and advanced fero- 
ciously. ‘And what the devil do you want charging in 
here like this, eh? What 's the game, eh? ' 

‘Lena. Lena/ 

‘Do you mean my daughter, Lena? What are you 
talking about? What about her? What the blazes has 
she got to do with you ? * 

‘ I think — I 've killed her/ 

‘Killed her? ' 

‘Yes/ And Turgis stumbled to a chair and began 
sobbing. 

‘My God I he 's mad, he 's clean mad/ cried Mr. Golspie 
to Miss Matfield, who had risen from her chair and was 
looking from Turgis to Mr. Golspie in startled bewilder- 
ment. ‘Here, you, stop that blubbering, and try to talk 
sense. What do you know about my daughter, Lena? 
You 've never even set eyes on her/ 

‘I have/ cried Turgis, almost indignantly. *1 was with 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


394 

her to-night, in your flat. I 've been there before. I took 
some money there first ' He hesitated. 

'That 's right, he did take some money there/ said Miss 
Matfield quickly. ‘Oh! — I believe it 's true/ 

Mr. Golspie pounced on him at once, clapping a heavy 
hand on his shoulder. ' Come on, then. What happened ? 
Get it out, quick.' 

Turgis blurted out a few sentences, broken and confused, 
but they were quite enough. 

‘ My God, if she is, I '11 kill you . Come on, get up, you — 
you bloody little rat, you — we 're going straight into that 
taxi and we 're going to see, and you 're coming with us.' 

' But can't you telelphone ? ' cried Miss Matfield, wildly. 

'Yes, of course — no, I can't. I knew I 'd have thought 
of it. The rotten telephone 's out of order — been out of 
order for two days. Come on, let 's get away. You turn 
the lights out, Lilian; I 'm going to look after this fellow. 
Hurry up, for God's sake/ 

It was a long long journey. For the first five minutes or 
so, nothing was said, but after that Mr. Golspie, out of 
sheer impatience, began to ask questions, and piece by 
wretched piece, he dragged the whole miserable story out 
of Turgis, who sat facing him, on one of the little seats, 
trembling, afraid every minute that Mr. Golspie was going 
to hurl himself across the tiny space at him. His misery 
was so great, now that his brain was clearer, that he felt 
that he would not mind being killed, but nevertheless Mr. 
Golspie's huge violence, repressed, but apparently ready to 
burst out any moment, terrified him. Miss Matfield hardly 
spoke a word the whole time, and when she did it was in a 
very soft shaky voice. But she stared at Turgis, and when 
the lights flashed in, he saw that her face was pale. It never 
occurred to him to wonder what she was doing there so late 
with Mr. Golspie. 

'It just shows you, doesn't it? ' said Mr. Golspie to Miss 
Matfield. 'If I hadn't suddenly thought during dinner I 
ought to slip back there for quarter of an hour, to tot those 
figures up to show that chap in the morning, we 'd never 
have seen this fellow. What were yon doing there anyhow ? 
I don't know if it *s much good asking you because you 
seem to me wrong in your damned head — but what were 
you doing there? ' 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 395 

'I don’t know/ Turgis muttered. *1 just went there. 
I didn’t know where I was going. I suppose when I got to 
the City, well, I just went to Angel Pavement — sort of 
force of habit/ 

‘Another ten minutes and we shouldn’t have been there, 
and then I shouldn't have got back home till twelve. What 
time is it now? Quarter past ten, eh? What time did 
you leave my place ? ’ 

1 1 don’t know really. I ’m all mixed up ’ 

'My God! — you are,’ said Mr. Golspie bitterly. 'And 
you ’re going to be a worse mix up soon, let me tell you.’ 

‘ I think — it couldn't have been much after eight — I don't 
know, though— -^might have been half-past eight.' 

' Nearly two hours — och I ' Mr. Golspie groaned. ‘ Here, 
this fellow’s got to drive faster than this, or we ’ll be all the 
damned night getting there.' 

It was horrible stumbling back up that garden path 
again, going through the hall and climbing the stairs once 
more. It was worse inside the flat. /You go in there and 
wait, you/ said Mr. Golspie, and gave hiin a mighty shove 
that landed him in the middle of the sitting-room, which 
seemed to him now, of all the places he had ever known, 
the most horrible, the most closely packed with misery, 
and the very sight of its cushions and fancy boxes made 
him feel sick. Nevertheless, he had not been there more 
than a minute before] he knew somehow that Lena was 
not dead. Then, after a few more minutes, voices came 
through the open door behind him, and he turned and 
crept nearer to it. 

'No, no, no/ cried a voice, and he recognized it at once 
as that of the foreign, witch-like old woman who lived 
downstairs, 'she would not ’ave a doctair. I loosen her 
dress and geef her cognac and do dees teeng and odair 
teengs, and ven I say “You ’ave a vairy great shock, my 
dee-air, ve call a doctair,” she say “No, no, no. No doc- 
tair.” Veil den, eet does not mattair. But I say “You 
go to bed. Aw, yes, you go to bed, at vonce, my dee-air.” 
And she deed not vant to go to bed, but I make her go/ 

'Little monkey 1’ Mr. Golspie rumbled. 'Good job you 
thought something was up, though, and came in. I 'm 
much obliged. Very grateful. Just take Miss Matfield here 
in to her, will you, and I '11 be back in a minute or two/ 



396 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

' Is she all right ? ' cried Turgis, as Mr. Golspie came into 
the room. 

4 1 don't know about that,' he replied grimly, 'but she 's 
a damned sight better than she was when you left her lying 
here, you crazy little skunk. Come here/ 

'Oh!— thank God!' 

'Come here. You can do your thanking afterwards/ 
And he grabbed Turgis by the lapel of his coat, and yanked 
him nearer. 'Just listen to me. There are one or two 
things I could do to you. To start with, I could give you 
such a damned good hiding you 'd never want to look at 
a girl, never mind put your hands on her, for the next six 
months. See?' And he shook Turgis with a sort of 
menacing playfulness, like a terrier with a rat. 'And 
while I 'm about it, here 's a bit of good advice for you. 
Keep away from 'em. You 're not a lady-killer, y' know — 
though, by God, you nearly were to-night — and if you take 
a good look at yourself, you '11 see why. Drop it. You 're 
no good at it. And another thing I could do to you, Mister 
half-starved caveman, is to hand you over to the police. 
I could do that all right, couldn't I ? ' he demanded, looking 
sternly at his wretched prisoner, who, hearing that tone 
and meeting that look, had every excuse for not realizing 
that this was the last thing Mr. Golspie had any idea of 
doing. 

'Yes, you could, Mr. Golspie,' he replied miserably. He 
saw himself marched off, locked in a cell. 

'Well, I 'm not going to, not yet, anyhow. But, listen 
— if I ever set eyes on you again, I will. If you come 
within a mile of this place ' 

'Oh, I won't, I won't.' And Turgis certainly meant it. 

' And you don't go back to that office, understand ? You 
don't go near it again. Keep right away from it. Keep 
away from me altogether, see?' 

‘Yes, yes, yes,' Turgis gasped, for now Mr. Golspie had 
stopped shaking him, but was pulling him backwards 
through the sitting-room doorway, almost lifting him 
bodily with that huge powerful grasp on his coat shoulder. 

' I don't ever want to see you again, unless it 's in the 
dock or the madhouse,' said Mr. Golspie, throwing open 
the door of the flat with one hand, while with the other he 
gave a violent twist and brought Turgis round in front of 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 397 

him. ‘The very sight of you turns my stomach, see? 
You understand? You're not going back to that office, 
and you 're not coming within a mile of this flat, and 
you're going to keep out of my sight and you're going 
to keep your nasty mouth shut too. You've been lucky 
to-night, my God, you have! But if ever I see you again 
you won't be lucky. So get out and bloody well stay 
out. There!' And Mr Golspie, spinning him round, re- 
leased his coat collar, put a hand in the small of his back, 
and with a short run and a tremendous heave, sent him 
sprawling down the stairs. He pitched forward badly, 
banged his nose so hard that it bled, and was bruised, but 
managed to pick himself up at the bottom and go blindly 
along the hall to the front door. 

He waited a minute outside, leaning dizzily against one 
of the pillars. The cool darkness rocked round him. In 
the garden, just by the broken statue of the boy and the 
two fishes, he was violently sick. 


VI 

Nearly all Nathaniel, Street was in darkness when he 
returned there that night. At No. 5 they were still up, 
and he could hear them singing; a rum lot, at No. 5. 
Across the street there was a light or two and a gramo- 
phone going somewhere. But that was all. No. 9 was 
in complete darkness; obviously they had all gone to bed, 
Edgar, too, for when Edgar was out, Mrs. Pelumpton always 
left a light in the hall for him, a courtesy she did not ex- 
tend to her two lodgers, Park and Turgis. If they were so 
late, they had to grope. Very quietly, slowly and pain- 
fully, for he had walked all th6 way from Maida Vale, 
partly because he wanted to arrive late and so avoid any 
questions, and was tired out, aching all over, Turgis crawled 
upstairs to his room at the top. There he lit the tiny gas 
mantle, and then sat down on his bed, resting his head 
in his hands. 

All his face felt stiff. Laboriously, he removed his soak- 
ing shoes, and was not surprised to find that his socks were 
wet. He put a match to the little gas-fire, which exploded 
with a startling bang in that stillness. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


398 

He did not take his socks off, but held out in turn the 
sole of each foot towards the gas-fire and watched it steam. 
He had no slippers; he was always meaning to buy some, 
but never did. He stared at his reflection, holding the 
cracked little mirror in the wooden frame near the gas- 
light. There was a bruise on the ridge of his rather 
prominent nose; dried blood caked about the nostrils; a 
long smear down one cheek and just above one eyebrow. 
The eyes, red-rimmed, stared back at him in despair. In 
all his life, he had never hated himself as much as he did 
then. The cracked face in the black wooden frame began 
to twitch a little, and he banished it. The water he had 
used before going out was still in the basin, and now he 
soaped his hands in it and rubbed them over his face, until 
his eyes smarted. When he had finished wiping his face, 
he looked at it again in the mirror, and found that the 
smears and dried blood had gone, but that the bruise was 
more marked than before. He did not look long. His 
face, pale and silly, disgusted him. Going through his 
pockets, he discovered a crumpled cigarette and had the 
first smoke for several hours. He remembered the last 
one, when he was on his way to Maida Vale, not five hours 
ago. Not five hours agol A hundred years ago. 

The haze had completely vanished from his mind, leaving 
a dreadful clarity. He saw himself quite clearly, and 
loathed what he saw. He knew now that Lena was simply 
a little flirt, who had happened to be bored, her friends 
being away, when he first called at the flat with the money, 
and had amused herself with him for a few hours because 
she had nothing better to do and, for the time being, his 
obvious worship entertained her. Then the minute some- 
body better came along, she had dropped him at once, and 
had afterwards been so ahnoyed that she had disliked the 
very sight of him. Now it seemed all quite clear, and it 
was unbelievable that he could not see it like that before, 
that he could have gone on dreaming away and hanging 
about to see her and deluding himself. He did not even 
hate her now. She simply did not interest him. 

What did interest him, however, was the figure he cut 
himself, and that was what he saw with such terrible clear- 
ness. As he sat drooping on the bed, pulling away me- 
chanically at the last inch of the cigarette, he put himself 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 399 

through a pitiless cross-examination. How could he ever 
have thought that he could make a girl like Lena fall in 
love with him, a girl who was pretty, who could meet all 
kinds of fellows, who had lived in places like Paris, who had 
a father with money? The very thought of Mr. Golspie 
crushed the last grains of self-respect in him. What had he, 
Harold Turgis, been fancying himself for? What was he? 
What could he do ? What had he got ? Nothing, nothing, 
nothing. Only a silly face, with a big useless nose and a 
trembling mouth and eyes that began to water almost if 
anybody looked hard at them. He threw the stump of his 
cigarette at the dirty saucer in front of the gas-fire, missed 
it, and had to go down painfully on his knees and retrieve 
the glowing end. 

He returned to the bed and curled up on it, his eyes fixed 
on some photographs, cut out of a film weekly, pinned up 
on the opposite wall; but he did not see the photographs, 
for he was staring through them, through ih£ wall, into the 
future, a vague darkness, in which he, a small lonely figure, 
moved obscurely. His job was gone. He had finished 
with Twigg and Dersingham and Angel Pavement. Per- 
haps they might have given him a rise soon ; he might have 
had Smeeth's job and seven or eight pounds a week before 
long, a proper home and carpets and arm-chairs and a big 
wireless set of his own; and now it might be a long time 
before he got a job as good as the one he had just lost. 
What could he do ? A bit of typing and clerking, that was 
all, and anybody could do that; even girls could do it; 
some of them, really educated ones like Miss Matfield (yes, 
and what had she been doing with Mr. Golspie?), just as 
well as he could. And when he had queued up and looked 
at advertisements and written letters and trailed round and 
waited and got a job at last, what then? What would he 
get out of it? Nothing. He saw the world before him 
with no happiness in it, only foolish work and weariness 
and unnamed fears, a place of jagged stones, shadows, dim 
menacing giants. 

Having got so far, he could go no further. A little voice, 
like that of some tiny erect indignant figure in a great 
gloomy assembly, spoke up now, protesting. It was not 
right. It was not fair. There had been a time when it 
had looked as if everything was going to be quite different. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


400 

Something had gone wrong. Where, how had it gone 
wrong? He could be happy; he could be as happy as 
anybody, if only he had a chance to be; and why hadn't he 
a chance to be? Here! — if he 'd a chance, he could be a 
lot happier than Park or Smeeth or even Mr. Dersingham — 
yes, he could! Then why shouldn't he be? What was 
wrong? What was it, what was it ? The little voice asked 
these questions, but no answer came. No answer. It was 
as if the erect figure suddenly collapsed and the gloomy 
assembly untroubled, unstirring. 

It was no good. Every bit of him, from the damp soles 
of his feet to his tangled hair (which seemed to have a 
separate and equally miserable existence of its own, this 
night), agreed that it was no good. He stood up. He 
looked about him, as if searching the little room in despair 
for something to touch, to hold, to cling to, now that the 
night was pouring in, through the decayed woodwork of the 
window frame, through the cracked mortar and the foul 
old stone, its malevolent influences, its beckoning and 
gibbering ghosts. The calm, the clarity, were gone; the 
dream fumes rose and drifted again; but when he moved, 
he still moved slowly, as if led here and there by uncertain 
spectral hands. He fastened the window tight, and 
stuffed paper in its various crevices. The door fitted 
badly, and he had to stuff more paper, indeed all the 
paper he had, between the door and the frame, and then 
in the keyhole. He turned off the gas from the tiny mantle, 
leaving the room uncertainly illuminated by the gas-fire. 
For a moment he considered the dying glow of the mantle. 
Could he use that gas? If he had a tube, he could, but he 
hadn't a tube; and if he turned it on full, it gave out so 
little gas that it would be painfully, horribly slow doing 
anything to him. No, the gas-fire was the thing. He had 
only to turn it out now, wait a minute or two until the 
burners had cooled, then put a hand to that tap again, lie 
on his bed and hear the gas hissing out for a minute or two, 
fall asleep and all would be over. 

He sat on the floor, in front of the fire, leaning his elbow 
against the side of his bed. Staring at the three twisted 
glowing pillars of the fire, he contemplated with sombre 
satisfaction his approaching end. It would be painless, 
that he knew, for he had once talked to a man in the 



THE. LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 401 

Pavement Dining Rooms, and this man had a brother who 
was a policemen, and this policeman had had a lot of ex- 
perience with people who had done it with gas and he gave 
it as his opinion that they all passed quietly away in their 
sleep without a bit of pain and fuss and worry: it was far 
easier getting out of the world altogether than taking a 
train to the City at Camden Town Tube Station. They 
would find him in the morning, peacefully asleep. There 
would be an inquest, and it would get into the papers. 
Some of them, Mr. Golspie and Lena perhaps, would have 
to give evidence. Mrs. Pelumpton too. Had the deceased 
been strange in his actions lately, had he something on his 
mind? A promising young fellow — would anybody say 
that? Tragic End, Young Clerk's Fatal Romance. Who 
would be really sorry? Nobody. No, no, one or two, 
perhaps a lot of people; you never knew. Poppy Sellers, 
for instance; Miss Matfield had said that little Poppy, poor 
kid, was keen on him; so that she ought to? be sorry, very 
sorry; perhaps it would be the great sorrow of her life — 

‘ He meant everything to me, that boy. I worshipped him ' 
— he could hear these, and other heart-broken phrases from 
the pictures, coming from a rather vague Poppy Sellers, 
very pale and dressed in black. It made him feel sorry 
himself, and it was the pleasantest feeling he had had for 
hours, quite warm and luxuriant. 

‘ A very sad case, gentlemen/ said the coroner mourn- 
fully. ‘Here you have a young man full of promise * 

Turgis interrupted him, for somehow Turgis was there too: 
‘It 's all right saying that now/ he cried to them all, tri- 
umphant in his bitterness, ‘but why didn't you do some- 
thing about it before? It 's too late now, and you know 
it is. Too late, too late! Let this,' he continued sternly, 
‘be a warning to you/ But that was silly. He would be 
dead and gone. Perhaps he ought to leave a letter; they 
usually left letters; but he hated writing letters, and he 
knew there was no ink in the room. No, of course, he 
hadn't any ink! He 'd nothing! He might as well finish 
it off now, and show them all, the rotten swine! 

As he arrived at this savage conclusion, he noticed for 
the first time that the three little glowing pillars of the gas- 
fire were dwindling. They shrank rapidly, until they were 
nothing but quivering blue blobs that shot up once and 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


402 

popped, shot up again and popped, then popped out alto- 
gether. No more gas. He hadn't a shilling, he had only 
eightpence. He couldn't even commit suicide, couldn't 
afford it. 

After a short silence, an unusual sound, a most strange 
sound, a fantastic and incredible sound, came from the 
side of the bed and travelled round the dark little room. 
It came from Turgis, and he may have been crying, he 
may have been laughing, or doing both at once. He was 
certainly not committing suicide. 

He made a great deal of noise now. Putting out a hand, 
quite instinctively, to the tap of the gas-fire, he touched 
something hot in the darkness there, gave a sharp cry and 
banged his hand on the floor. Then he stumbled to the 
window, to pull out the paper, and somehow the window 
stuck and he pushed so hard that when it did open, the 
rotten old woodwork of the frame partly gave way, and as 
it suddenly flew open and the night air rushed in, there was 
a loud crack. The door was noisier still. He was deter- 
mined to get all the paper away, but it was not easy and 
he was impatient, and he began pulling away at the knob 
of the door until at last the door suddenly swung in and 
he sat down with a bump, the knob still in his hand. It 
was then that he heard sounds from below, and saw through 
the open door a light travelling jerkily upwards. The next 
minute he was looking at the extraordinary figure of Mr. 
Pelumpton, who was standing outside in his nightshirt, 
holding a candle. 

‘Now let 'sh 'ave reashon, let 'sh ’ave reashon,' said 
Mr. Pelumpton reproachfully. 'Bangin' and knocking the 
housh about like that! The mishish thought shomebody 
was breakin' in. 'Ave a bit o' shensh, boy, jusht 'ave a 
bit o' shensh! Can't go on like that, thish time o' night. 
It 'sh all very well going out an’ 'aving a pint or two an' 
coming in late — done it myshelf in me time — but that 'sh 
no reashon for carrying on like that, ish it? Blesh me 
shoul! — like a nearthquake, jusht like a nearthquake. Now 
jusht get yourshelf to bed quietly, boy, and let other people 
shleep even if you can't.' 

‘ I 'm sorry,* Turgis told him. * It was an accident. 

I 'm all right. I 'm not drunk or anything.' 

‘Well, you might be in the ratsh, properly in the ratsh, 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 403 

green sherpentsh all round you, the way ycr going on/ 
said Mr. Pelumpton severely, as he withdrew. 

In ten minutes, Turgis was fast asleep. 


VII 

'Well, we 'll have to see,' said Mrs. Pelumpton dubiously. 
‘That 's what we '11 have to do, we '11 have to see.' 

Turgis had been trying to explain, without any reference 
to the real facts, why he hadn’t gone to the office that 
Saturday morning, why he wasn't going there again, and 
why he couldn't immediately pay Mrs. Pelumpton what he 
owed her. He had not come down to breakfast until late, 
and both Pelumptons were convinced that he had been 
uproariously drunk on the previous night, when he made 
all that noise. 

‘I 'm sure they '11 let me have this fortnight's money all 
right, Mrs. Pelumpton,' he told her. ‘And then I '11 settle 
up at once, before I do anything else.' 

Mrs. Pelumpton stopped bustling about for a minute, 
stood and looked at him, making herself as compact as 
possible, so that she seemed exactly square from the front ; 
and suddenly said in a startlingly deep voice: ‘Will you 
promise me one thing? ' 

Turgis said he would. He was ready to promise any- 
thing to her. 

‘Well, it 's this. Promise me to keep right off the drink 
this next week or two.' 

‘I promise,' he replied promptly. Two glasses of bitter 
a week were usually enough for him at any time. The 
Pelumptons were positive, however, that he had been 
drinking heavily for weeks. Mr. Pelumpton, a beer man 
himself, said that whisky made you look and behave like 
that, if you could only get enough of it. 

‘In or out of work, that 'abit 's bad,' Mrs. Pelumpton 
continued. ‘But far, far worse it is, out of work. Keep 
off it for a bit. Don't touch a drop. I 'm not one of these 
prohibited and temperancers — though I did sign the pledge 
when I was a girl, but then I wouldn't 'ave touched a drop 
then anyhow, didn't like the taste of it — but I do say that 
a young feller like yourself who 's going to 'ave to look for 
093 « 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


404 

a job is better without a single drop, if only for the sake of 
not being smelt/ 

' I 'm sure you 're right, Mrs. Pelumpton,' said Turgis, 
who was hoping that this good advice meant that she 
was willing to let him stay on while he was looking for 
another job. 

*1 know I am. And what's just 'appened — 'cos you 
can talk about business until you 're blue in the face, but 
you won't make me believe you haven’t got into trouble 
with your little goings-on lately and that 's why they 've 
given you the sack — but I say, what 's just 'appened ought 
to be a lesson. You can't afford it and you 'aven't got the 
'ead for it, so you 've just got to let the booze alone. Pa 
can't afford it, but I will say, 'e 's got the 'ead for it. You 
'aven't. That 's why it 's a lesson. Promise me that, 
and I '11 let you run on a bit, paying me what you can, 
while you 're out of a job. We 've got to live and let live 
in these times, and I will say that up to lately you 've been 
as quiet and reg’lar paying a young chap as I 've ever let to. 
And just to keep on pa's right side too, for 'e won't like it, 
being in business himself you might say and a bit of a 
stickler, but I 've got a softer nature and I 'm not for 
turning a young chap out just 'cos he 's got his bit of 
trouble and can't pay all he 's agreed to pay ' 

'Thanks very much, Mrs. Pelumpton,' said Turgis 
warmly. 

# — For a few weeks anyhow,’ she added cautiously. 

Turgis thanked her again, but with considerably less 
warmth this time. It might be more than a few weeks 
before he saw another three pounds a week or anything 
like it, and the way Mrs. Pelumpton talked before she said 
that, he had imagined she was ready to let him stay on 
for months. Still, a few weeks were something. He had 
dreaded telling her that he had lost his job, had not even 
got this fortnight's money, and would have to keep her 
waiting. He felt a bit better now that he had told her, 
but nevertheless he was still feeling pretty miserable. He 
wondered what was happening in the office, whether Mr. 
Golspie had explained to Mr. Dersingham what had oc- 
curred last night, whether they would send his money on to 
him, whether they would give him a reference. He had 
exactly eightpence now and he wanted a cigarette badly 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 405 

this morning. It was no use, he would have to have a 
smoke. So he went down the road for a packet of ten 
gaspers, and then decided to go and look at some advertise- 
ments of jobs and perhaps have a peep at the Labour 
Exchange. It was one of those uncomfortable streaky 
days, a minute or two of sunshine, then clouds and a bitter 
east wind. It was miserable walking about in it with just 
twopence in your pocket, no job, a terrifying Mr. Golspie 
(with possible police) somewhere about, and no hope in 
any direction. When he saw the Labour Exchange, he was 
sorry he had gone that way, for the very look of it made 
him feel still more wretched. He hated Labour Exchanges. 

It was late when he had dinner, and when it was over and 
Mrs. Pelumpton was washing and tidying up in that de- 
spairing fury at which she always arrived on Saturday, 
Mr. Pelumpton returned from the pub down the road, im- 
mensely oracular, and insisted on talking to Turgis for the 
next hour. This time Turgis was compelled to stay there 
and listen, for already he was beginning to feel that he was 
there on sufferance. Moreover, with only twopence in his 
pocket, and an east wind blowing outside, he was better 
off there than he would be anywhere else. Something 
must have told Mr. Pelumpton this, for he never took his 
dim boiled eyes off Turgis, and droned on and on, some- 
times touching on the dusty mysteries of ‘dealing/ some- 
times offering ridiculous good advice. It was awful. 
Turgis sat there, steadily hating the old bore. 'That's 
right, Mr. Pelumpton,' he would say, with dreary polite- 
ness, adding to himself: ‘You silly old devil, you ought to 
give those whiskers of yours a good wash and brush up.’ 
But there was not much satisfaction in that. 

At about half-past three, Mr. Pelumpton's steady flow 
was suddenly checked. Somebody was at the front door. 
Mrs. Pelumpton immediately made a dramatic appearance 
from nowhere, crying, ‘You go and see, pa. It might be 
Maggie,' and then waited, tense, with lifted brows and open 
mouth, while pa shuffled out of the room and along the hall. 

‘Yersh, that 'sh right/ they heard him say. /Come 
inshide. Jusht a minute.' And then he came shuffling 
back, so maddeningly deliberate that his wife's eyes began 
rolling round with sheer impatience. ‘Is it Mrs. Foster? ' 
she cried. 



406 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

'No, it ishn’t Mishish Foshter/ he replied, with dignity. 
He looked at Turgis. 1 It 'sh a young lady from your 
office who 'sh been shent to shee you/ 

'Take her in the front,* said Mrs. Pelumpton, before 
Turgis could get out of the room. 

It was little Poppy Sellers, and Turgis took her into the 
front ; which only made it all the more queer, for he hardly 
ever went into that room. It was used only on the most 
special occasions, and for about three hundred and sixty 
days of the year it remained a shrouded and mysterious 
chamber. It housed, behind faded lace curtains, some of 
Mr. Pelumpton's best bargains in ‘pieshesh/ a piano with a 
pleated silk front, two arm-chairs that were very shiny and 
plushy, half a bearskin rug, several books in one glass case, 
dozens of butterflies in another case, two real oil paintings 
of waterfalls, and a fine collection of shells, glass paper- 
weights, wool mats, marble ash-trays, and souvenirs of 
all the south-eastern seaside resorts. Above the mantel- 
piece, and flanked by two tall mirrors that had storks 
painted on them, Mrs. Pelumpton's father, so immensely 
enlarged in sepia that at a first glance he seemed to be a 
generous view of the Alps, stared down in mild astonish- 
ment. The air inside this room was quite different from 
that of the rest of the house ; it did not smell of food at all ; 
it was unlived-in, chilly, with hints of wool and varnish 
in it. There was a large paper fan in the fire-place, and 
immediately the two human beings entered the room, a 
host of indignant specks ran down the folds of this fan, 
making a queer little flicker of movement and sound in that 
dim quiet place. 

'I*ve brought your money/ said Poppy, bringing an 
envelope out of her scarlet handbag. She was very smart, 
this afternoon, in a black and white check coat, a hat nearly 
the same colour as her handbag, a yellow scarf with red 
dots in it, and dark silky stockings and shiny black shoes. 
Not the Japanese style this time — more French. She 
looked well in that front parlour, sitting in one of the 
plushy arm-chairs. 'Yes, this is it/ she continued, handing 
it over. ' I think you *11 find that all right. Mr. Smeeth 
said somebody had better take it, and I said I would, 'cos I 
have a cousin that lives up here, in Bartholomew Road, and 
I sometimes come up here, so I said I didn't mind bringing 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 407 

it, cos I know the district, even if I do live a long way off, 
and I hadn't anything special to do to-day.' She rattled 
this off very quickly, as if it were a set piece she had re- 
hearsed a good many time on the way. 

'Thanks very much,' said Turgis. Recent events had 
left him with an imagination that was capable of leaping 
into life very suddenly. It leaped now. Here was Poppy 
Sellers bringing his money to him just as he had taken the 
money to Lena Golspie. She had been ready with a good 
excuse just as he had. This thought did not immediately 
pluck him out of his despondency, but it certainly made 
him feel several inches taller at once. Besides, the kid had 
made herself look so neat and smart, quite pretty, in fact. 

'Aren't you well?' she asked him, looking at him very 
earnestly. 

'I'm not too bright,* he admitted. * Matter of fact, 
I 've been a bit off colour for some time. Nothing much, 
y'know. Nerves, really, that 's what it Is. I 'm one of 
those highly strung people, I am.' 

'You look pale, and you 've got a marfc on your nose, 
haven't you?' She examined his face in that special 
detached way that all women seem to have at times, 
looking at your face as if it was not part of you, but some- 
thing you were showing them, like a picture or a piece of 
china. Then she nodded wisely at it. *1 believe some- 
thing's been up. Here, listen,' she continued eagerly, 
‘something's happened, hasn't it? I mean, you're not 
coming back, are you? ' 

Turgis admitted sadly that he was not. 

‘I've been puzzling and puzzling my head about it,' 
she told him, a mounting excitement in her face and voice. 
‘When you didn't come this morning, Mr. Smeeth said 
you must be ill, and he wasn't surprised. And I thought 
so, too. And Miss Matfield didn't say anything, and I 
thought she looked a bit queer, as if she knew something. 
She does, too, I 'm sure, though I don't know what. She 
doesn't tell me much — bit stand-offish, you know, though 
she 's nice, she really is — but she knows a lot, and some- 
thing 's been going on with her some time, if you ask me. 
But, anyhow, Mr. Golspie came in, later on, and he was 
talking to Mr. Dersingham, and then they sent for Mr. 
Smeeth, and after a bit, Mr. Smeeth came back and said 



408 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

later on, y' know, just trying to be ordinary like, as if 
nothing special had happened, that you weren't coining 
back. I knew all the time there was something funny 
about it. And I didn't see how they 'd told you, 'cos you 
didn't know last night, did you ? Course it 's not my 
business, I know,' she added, with a wistful note, 'but I 
couldn't help wondering. And I 'm sorry, too.' 

'You 're sorry I 'm not coming back? ' 

‘Yes, I am,' she declared, tightening her lips, nodding, 
then looking him full in the face. ‘I don't care what 
anybody says — I am.' 

' I 'm sorry, too. Can't be helped, I suppose. I 've 
been in trouble.' His voice trembled slightly as a wave 
of self-pity swept over him. 

She kept her eyes fixed on his, and they were dark and 
round. ' Did you — do something ? ' 

He nodded. Already, even in this nod, there was a 
certain gloomy romantic suggestion. 

'Course you needn't tell me if you don't want,' she 
said hastily, ' but p'r'aps you 'd like to, 'cos I 'm not trying 
to poke my nose in — it 's not that— but I 'd reelly, reelly, 
like to know — 'cos — well, it doesn't seem a bit fair, turning 
you off like that, and I said so this morning. You 've 
always done your work all right, and you knew a lot about 
it, didn't you? I 'm sure you 've helped me a lot, and I 
don't care who knows it. And I said so straight out. 
I spoke up for you. They can say what they like about me, 
but I do stick up for my friends and anybody I like.' Then 
she lowered her voice. ‘You didn't take something, did 
you?' 

'D' you mean — pinch some money? ' 

‘Yes/ she replied, looking down at her brilliant handbag. 

'I should think I didn't. Nothing like that. It wasn't 
anything to do with Twigg and Dersingham's at all. It was 
something — quite different/ 

' I see.' She ran a finger up and down the bag. Nothing 
was said for a minute. As the room, chill and shuttered, 
waited for somebody to speak, there stole into it all the 
Saturday afternoon noises of Nathaniel Street, but all faint, 
muffled. Mrs. Pelumpton's father stared down at them 
with mild astonishment. Turgis, sitting up in the other 
arm-chair, tapped a foot, and a few more specks stirred in 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 409 

the paper fan. This front room made him feel miserable, 
hopeless. He looked at the girl, and though she was so 
quiet now, she seemed delightfully vivid, warm, alive, 
human. He did not tell himself that, but he felt it. 

‘Well, I suppose/ she began, grasping her bag properly 
and making a movement of her body. 

‘Listen, I’ll tell you what happened,* he said quickly. 

‘You needn't if you don't want, y' know.* 

He did want. He told her almost the whole story, as 
he saw it then, and he did not see it then quite as he had 
seen it when he had returned in abject misery to his room 
the previous night. It took on a certain romantic colouring, 
and, as the history of a poor, virtuous, infatuated young 
man and a rich, wicked siren, it was not unlike a good 
many films that both the narrator and his hearer had seen 
and admired. She listened enthralled, exclaiming now and 
then, her eyes round with wonder. : 

Her first question, when he had done, was about Lena. 
What was she like, and did he still think she was as pretty 
as all that? This was not an easy question to answer, 
for he had to convey the impression that Lena was im- 
mensely seductive, and at the same time to suggest that 
she had no further attraction for him. But he contrived 
to answer it, a trifle awkwardly, perhaps, but he satisfied 
Poppy. 

‘Course you never ought to have done that/ she cried, 
thinking of his terrible assault upon the jeering ‘vamp.' 
The glance she gave him, however, had more wonder and 
awe in it than disgust. It made him feel that he was not 
a man to be trifled with. ‘ That was awful, that was. You 
didn't reelly know what you were doing at the time, 
did you?’ 

‘That’s it. I didn’t. Nerves, y' know. Highly strung. 
A sort of madness, it was. Can't imagine now how I did 
it, ’cos I've never been that sort of chap, though, mind 
you, I've always had a temper if I got properly roused. 
Still, I don’t know how I came to do it, I don't, really I 
don’t. Must have been properly mad at the time. Seems 
strange now, I can tell you, ’cos I don’t feel anything about 
it now, nothing at all.’ 

‘Well, I don't say you ought to have done it, 'cos you 
oughtn’t, and it's turned out lucky the way it has.' She 



410 AftGEL PAVEMENT 

had a moment of real distress, imagining how it might 
have turned out. Then she went on to consider other 
aspects of the matter. ‘But I must say she very near 
deserved it, whatever happened, going on the way she did/ 
She had throughout shown the greatest indignation with 
Lena. ‘Horrible, I call it. Some girls haven't any real 
feeling at all. Girl I know — she lives near us, and she 's 
one of these manicurists — she 's just the same. Treats 
boys and talks about them, too, in the most awful way. 
If they only heard what she said about them, they 'd never 
look at her again. She 's asking for trouble, too, and she *11 
get it before long, and it 'll serve her right — I haven't a bit 
of sympathy for her. I wouldn't behave to a boy like that, 
I don't care who he was, not if I 'd never liked him at all 
and he was always follering me round and all that. And 
look at the way she went and encouraged you at the first, 
making herself as cheap as anything — that ought to have 
told you, but, of course, boys can never see that/ 

*1 can see it now,' said Turgis, with the air of a man 
purged and purified by great suffering, a pale romantic 
figure. 

‘Boys haven't a bit of sense like that,' she cried in- 
dignantly. ‘And you were just as silly as the test, in that 
business. Mind you, I can see there 's a good excuse for 
you, 'cos a girl like that, with her father so well off and able 
to have all the clothes she wants and make herself look 
nice all the time — course you think it 's all natural, her 
looking like that, but it 's having the money and nothing 
else to do that does it — well, there is some excuse, and I 
admit it. Fancy you going on with Mr. Golspie's daughter 
like that ! And I never knew I Doesn' t it just show you ? ' 

Undoubtedly it did. They continued a little longer, 
dramatically and not unpleasantly, in this strain, and 
then Miss Sellers asked what time it was, and Turgis, 
instead of telling her the time, said : ' Just a minute. Don't 
go. I want to give my landlady some of this money, and 
I 'd rather not keep her waiting for it. I '11 be back in 
half a minute.' 

Mrs. Pelumpton, who was making tea, was very pleased 
to see the money. 

‘This young lady works in the same office, you see/ 
Turgis explained, ‘and they sent her up with it. We've 



THE LAST ARABIAN NIGHT 411 

been having a good talk about all the business and all that/ 

'Quite so/ said Mrs. Pelumpton, affably but with dignity, 
as if the very presence of a strange member of her own sex 
in the house, even though not in the same room, made 
her put on a special manner, affable, dignified, lady-like. 
‘Perhaps the young lady would like a cup of tea, with 
yourself — that is, if she cares to take us as she finds us? * 

‘Thanks very much, Mrs. Pelumpton/ cried Turgis. 
‘I'll go and ask her/ 

Miss Sellers was easily persuaded to abandon a pro- 
jected visit to her cousin in Bartholomew Road, and 
stayed to tea, during which she and Mrs. Pelumpton dis- 
covered, after a great deal of elaborate cross-questioning, 
that Miss Sellers and her sister had actually stayed for a 
week in a boarding-house at Clacton that had been kept, 
three years before they went there, by Mrs. Pelumpton’s 
sister, whom therefore they had only missed meeting by 
two years and ten months. Delighted to discover once 
more they were living in a world so small, so cosy, Miss 
Sellers and Mrs. Pelumpton were very jfleased with one 
another. After tea, when the Pelumpton* were out of the 
way, Turgis, though still the same young man, without 
prospects, without hope, actually went to the length of 
indulging in that mysterious badinage which is the signal 
of sexual attraction and interest among the young in- 
articulate creatures of this country. ‘ What d’ you mean? ' 
they cried to one another. ‘ Oh, I don't mean what you 
mean!' 

Then, at the end of half an hour or so of this: ‘Well* 
I half promised to see a girl friend to-night/ 

‘Oh, well, don’t bother/ he told her. ‘She can do 
without you, can't she, just for to-night? ' 

‘Just for to-night, eh? Well, can’t you do without me 
too, Mister Cheeky? ' 

‘No, I can't. I want somebody to cheer me up/ 

'Oh, that 's it, is it? Thanks for the compliment 
Anybody will do, eh? ' 

‘No, I didn't say that. You know, I didn't/ 

‘Well, you meant it/ 

‘No, I didn't. Reely, I didn't. Come on. What 
d' you say?' 

‘All right then/ she said, turning her perky little head 

*093® 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


412 

on one side and smiling. Then she looked serious. ‘ Listen, 
though. If we do go, I must pay for myself. Yes, I must. 
I believe in that,' she added earnestly, as if she had thought 
about it for years and had not just invented this rule for 
herself, knowing only too well that he would be hard up 
in the near future and that every extra shilling would make 
a great difference. ‘ I ’ll come if you ’ll let me pay for 
myself. There now!’ 

As they walked down Nathaniel Street, they decided 
that it must be one of the big West End picture theatres, 
but could not settle which it should be, and argued pleas- 
antly about it, and she pretended to care more about it 
than she actually did and he pretended to care less; she 
was the eager, excited, imploring female, and he was the 
large, knowing, tolerant, protective male. Out in the 
smoky blue and gold of the lighted streets, they were more 
at ease than they had been in the house. Already they 
may have felt that they were going further together now 
than the way to the remotest picture theatre could take 
them. Perhaps this was the best day's work in one or 
other of their lives; perhaps the worst. Saturday night: 
the children of the pavements and chimney-pots came 
pouring out, seeking adventure, entertainment, profit or 
forgetfulness in the vast impersonal thunder and glare of 
the city; and soon these two were lost in the crowd. 



CHAPTER XI 


THEY GO HOME 
I 

It was coming to a close like any other Friday afternoon. 
They were short-handed, for though the new boy, Gregory 
Thorpe, from Hatcham, S.E., a lad with a singularly long 
face and spectacles, far more conscientious than Stanley 
but not so engaging, had been with them since Monday, 
Turgis had been absent since Monday too, and his place 
had not yet been filled. Fortunately, they had not been 
very busy this last day or two ; the rush of a few weeks before 
appeared to be over now ; Mr. Golspie had not been near the 
office since Tuesday, and had not sent in any new orders,; 
and the next Anglo-Baltic boat was not due in until the 
following Monday; so that things were easier. Even 
without Turgis, they were getting through the work at 
the usual pace. Mr. Smeeth, glancing round over the top 
of his desk, thought they ought to have finished in another 
half-hour or three-quarters. He would get away about 
six, have his tea in comfort, with plenty of time to spare 
before the concert began. He was going to hear that 
symphony by Brahms, the same symphony he had heard 
before, the one that suddenly and gloriously broke into 
Ta turn ta ta turn turn. Another orchestra was playing 
it this time. It was lucky that the advertisement of the 
concert had caught his eye: Brahms’s Symphony No. i. 
He had been looking forward all the week to hearing that 
symphony again, especially to that moment when the great 
melody would come sweeping out of the strings again. 
He had tried to remember it for weeks and weeks, and then 
suddenly it had returned to him — Ta turn ta ta turn turn. 
Brahms might be as classical and highbrow as they said he 
was (and Mr. Smeeth had been making a few inquiries), but 
the fact remained that the thought of his first symphony, 
that dark but splendid adventure, now warmed the heart 

4i3 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


414 

of Herbert Norman Smeeth. Ta turn ta ta turn turn — but 
no, he must get on with his work, finish off and see that 
the others were finishing off too. 

'Miss Matfield, have you anything for Mr. Dersingham to 
sign? Have you, Miss Sellers? Take them in now if 
you have/ 

Mr. Dersingham was in the private office. He had been 
there most of the day. This was unusual, and rather queer 
because Mr. Dersingham did not appear to be very busy. 
He seemed to be waiting for something or somebody. 
Several times during the afternoon, when the outer door 
had opened, Mr. Smeeth had heard Mr. Dersingham come 
out of the private office, as if he could not bear to wait an 
extra half-minute or so. He seemed to be jumpy, too, 
about telephone calls. Very unusual, rather queer, not 
like Mr. Dersingham. Mr. Smeeth came to the conclusion 
that it must be some private business, and therefore no 
affair of his. 

'Now where's that letter from Poppett and Sons?' he 
demanded. * It was on this desk an hour ago, I *11 swear. 
It 's a letter about their account, and I told one of you this 
morning we 'd have to answer it to-day. It was you, 
wasn't it, Miss Sellers? Well, have you taken their letter 
away, then? Just see if you have. Yes, there you are — 
that 's it. Bring it here and I '11 answer it now. Poppett 
and Sons, Poppett and Sons,' Mr. Smeeth repeated idly as 
he re-read their letter. ‘Ye-es. Are you ready? No, 
half a minute, though — my mistake. I '11 have to check 
that figure. Fi-ifty fo-our pounds, thi-irte-een shillings — 

yes, yes, that 's all right. Now then ' And here Mr. 

Smeeth adjusted his eyeglasses and cleared his throat, 
giving a faintly pompous little cough. Even now, the 
thought that he, Herbert Norman Smeeth, was sitting 
there, a cashier, dictating letters to this firm and that, gave 
him a thrill. ' — er — We are in receipt of your — er — 
communication — put the date in there, Miss Sellers — 
respecting our statement of account dated so-and-so— and 
beg to point out that this account was quite in order. 
You asked us to send down the goods by special road 
delivery and agreed that the extra carriage, paid by us, 
should be added to our account — no, just a minute — extra 
carriage, which had to be paid by us in the first place. 



THEY GO HOME 415 

should be charged to you, and this we accordingly did. We 
refer you to your letter — I have a note of that letter — ah ! 
here it is — to your letter of the 4th of December last * 

Mr. Smeeth rounded off his letter and Miss Sellers hurried 
it away to her machine. Miss Matfield, who appeared to 
be in a great hurry, pulled a sheet of paper out of her type- 
writer with one fine sweep of the hand, and then furiously 
tidied a little pile of typewritten sheets. The new boy, 
Gregory, laboriously worked away at his letter copying, 
with the air of a man engaged in not very hopeful bacterial 
research. It was wearing away like any other Friday 
afternoon. There was nothing to suggest that it might 
blow up any minute, unless the unusual activities of Mr. 
Dersingham, who appeared to be moving uneasily now in 
the private office, were considered to be fantastically 
significant. 

‘ Who was that ? * Mr. Smeeth asked, af^er several doors 
had banged and Gregory had returned from behind the 
frosted glass partition. 

'I think it was a telegraph boy, sir/ replied Gregory 
sadly. 

* How d* you mean — you think it was? * . 

‘ Mr. Dersingham was there, sir. He got there first, and 
he was holding the door open and taking something, so I 
couldn't see who it was properly. I only saw an arm, and 
it looked like a telegraph boy. You see what I mean 
about the door, sir? It comes back, inside, when it opens, 
and Mr. Dersingham was holding it with one hand, and so 
the door was in the way, you see ’ 

'Yes, yes, yes, I see. No need to make such a song 
about it, boy/ There was a sad earnestness about this 
new boy that had been rather impressive at first, but now 
it only irritated Mr. Smeeth. He liked a boy to be con- 
scientious with his work, but this one was too dolefully 
dutiful. You could not even relieve your feelings by 
telling him sharply to get on with his work, because he 
never stopped doing something, toiling away like a 
spectacled young sheep. Mr. Smeeth wished now he had 
chosen a brighter boy, even if the lad would have larked 
about a bit. 

‘Smeeth. Smeeth/ 

'Yes, Mr. Dersingham/ Mr. Smeeth called back, fro wnin g 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


416 

a little. He did not like to be summoned in this fashion, by 
a shout from the door of the private office; it was not 
dignified. He hurried in, however, for Mr. Dersingham 
sounded as if he had something important he wanted to say. 

‘ Shut the door, Smeeth/ said Mr. Dersingham, who did 
not look so pink and cheerful as usual. * Oh, look here — 
have they nearly finished out there? * 

‘Just clearing up, sir.* 

'All right, then/ said Mr. Dersingham wearily. 'Have 
I signed everything? Tell 'em to let me have everything 
that must go off to-night, will you? I want 'em to clear 
out, and leave us alone. Do that now. Just get them to 
finish up as quick as possible.' 

Wondering, rather apprehensive now, Mr. Smeeth bustled 
to and fro with letters to be signed, hurried on Miss Sellers 
and the boy, and in ten minutes had everything signed, 
copied, sealed up, and stamped. ‘Yes, yes,' he told them, 
‘that'll be all. You can go now. That's right. Good 
night, Miss Matfield. What's that? Yes, I remember. 
Mr. Dersingham said you could have to-morrow morning 
off, didn't he? Off for the week-end, eh? Lucky to be 
some people. Miss Matfield. Yes, yes, quite all right, good 
night. Good night, Miss Sellers. And — what's your 
name — Gregory, don’t forget you 've got three registereds 
there; bring me the receipts in the morning. No, that '11 
do. Good night, good night.' He returned to the private 
office. ‘All finished now, Mr. Dersingham. Yes, all gone.' 

'All right, Smeeth. Bring the order book in, then the 
other books. Bring the order book in first/ 

It looked as if he was going to have a little stocktaking 
and general survey of the business, a very wise thing to do 
too, now and again. Mr. Smeeth hoped that he would not 
be kept long, but otherwise he was quite pleased and 
proud, for there was nothing he liked better than these 
confidential talks about the business, and he was glad to 
see that Mr. Dersingham was taking himself seriously now 
as the head of a very flourishing little concern. 

‘Nothing wrong, I hope, Mr. Dersingham? ' he said, when 
he had brought in all the books. 

Mr. Dersingham gave a short laugh, and it was a very 
unpleasant sound. It startled Mr. Smeeth. 

^Everything 's wrong, Smeeth, every damned thing. 



THEY GO HOME 417 

unless you can see a way out. Sit down, man, sit down. 
We 're going to be hours and hours on this job.' 

Mr. Smeeth sat down, staring at him. 

'Golspie 's cleared out,' Mr. Dersingham continued, ‘and 
he 's done us in, absolutely done us in. Oh, the rotten 
swine! God, I was a fool to trust that chap a yard! I 
ought to have known, I ought to have known. And now 
he 's gone. I rushed up to that flat of his in Maida Vale 
at lunch time, hoping to catch him in and have it out with 
him, but he 'd gone — at least, the maid said he had, and 
it was only a furnished place he 'd taken, and she 'd been 
taken over with it, so I suppose she wasn't lying about it. 
He 's going abroad, if he isn’t already gone. Clearing out 
properly, the rotten crook! This isn’t the only dirty game 
he 's been playing here, if you ask me. I always thought 
he had a few more irons in the fire besides his work here. 
He never spent more than half his time with our business. 
But he 's had plenty of time to do us down/ He was out 
of his chair now, kicking a ball of crumpled paper about 
the room. 

‘But what's happened, Mr. Dersingham? I thought 
you knew he might leave us. You told me so a week or 
two ago, and you said you were getting him to sign an 
agreement, when he drew all that forward commission, so 
that you would have the agency/ 

‘Oh, we 've got the agency all right,' cried Mr. Dersing- 
ham, with great bitterness. ‘No mistake about that. 
Only it 's not worth having now, that ’s all. Mikorsky's 
have raised all their prices. They say it 's owing to the 
increased cost of their new process and to some labour 
troubles and to some new government tax — oh, they 've 
got all kinds of reasons, and they may be true and they 
may not, but the fact remains they 've raised all their 
prices. They 're all up fifty and sixty and even seventy 
per cent/ 

'As much as that? Good Lord, Mr. Dersingham, that 's 
a ridiculous advance. It makes them as dear as the most 
expensive of the old firms we were dealing with before, 
doesn't it? I see, now.' 

‘No, you don't see, you don't see at all yet,' Mr. Der- 
singham yelled at him. ‘It's a lot worse than that. 
Look at that telegram. Just look at it.' 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


418 

'I don't understand this, sir/ said Mr. Smeeth, after 
carefully reading the telegram. 'Why did they send 
it?' 

'They sent it because I 'd wired to them asking if what 
Golspie had written to me was true. I thought he might 
have been bluffing, just out of devilish spite. But he 
wasn't. They 're all in league together, of course, if you 
want my opinion, just a lot of rotten foreign swindlers 
with this chap Golspie the worst of the lot.' 

* I 'm sorry, Mr. Dersingham. I can see it 's a bad busi- 
ness. But I don't quite get the hang of it yet. They can't 
have raised their prices already.' 

'My GodI — that 's just’what they have done, and that 
filthy telegram confirms it.' Mr. Dersingham banged it 
so hard with his fist that he hurt his hand. Then he 
became quieter and sat down again. 'I'm getting too 
excited. Sorry I yelled like that, Smeeth, though it 's 
enough to make any man shout his head off. I '11 explain. 
I got a letter from Golspie this morning, saying that he 
was clearing out. Here, you can read it for yourself.' 

Mr. Smeeth read it through twice. It pretended to be 
an ordinary business letter, but there was a good deal of 
unpleasant irony in it. One phrase, which practically said 
that Mr. Dersingham had tried to sneak the agency for 
himself and had not succeeded, made Mr. Smeeth look up 
and ask a question. ' Did you really write to those people 
and try to get the agency yourself, sir? ' he asked. 

Mr. Dersingham nodded. 

Mr. Smeeth hesitated a moment. 'I don't think you 
ought to have done that, sir,' he said finally, respectful 
but reproachful. 

‘That 's my business, Smeeth.' 

Mr. Smeeth looked down and remained silent. Neither 
of them spoke for a minute or two, and the room was 
strangely quiet. 

'Oh well,' cried Mr. Dersingham, struggling with his 
embarrassment, 'perhaps I oughtn't to. As it's turned 
out, it was a bad move. But I wasn't really trying any- 
thing underhand, y' know, Smeeth. It wasn't as if I was 
trying to take a fellow's living away from him, working 
behind his back. I know it might look a bit like that, 
to anybody who didn't know the circumstances, but it 



THEY GO HOME 419 

wasn’t. This chap Golspie was obviously one of these 
here-to-day-and-gone-to-morrow fellows— didn’t make any 
secret of it, boasted of it — and I never liked the look of 
him and I didn't know what tricks he might be up to. He 
came here, made use of our connection with the trade and 
our organization and everything and drew a heavy com- 
mission, as you know, and all the time he walked about 
the place as if he owned it. As I told you before, I couldn’t 
stand the chap — a terrible bounder. I tried to be as 
friendly as possible at first, but it wouldn’t work. And 
my wife took a strong dislike to him — she only met him 
once, but you know what women are, and she saw what 
he was in five minutes — and she was always telling me to 
have nothing more to do with him, to get rid of him. So 
I just wrote a confidential letter to Mikorsky’s, saying it 
would pay them to have the agency properly in the hands 
of a wholesale firm here like ours, and that the — er — 
present arrangement wasn’t really satisfactory to them or 
to us either, and that they ought to consider it. All in 
confidence, mind. That was just before he went over 
there, and of course they told him all about it. I didn’t 
know they were friends of his. I thought they had an 
ordinary business agreement, and I considered I was en- 
titled to suggest another business agreement, leaving 
Golspie out.’ 

'Yes, I see that,* said Mr. Smeeth, still a little doubtful. 
'And I suppose they told him then, and that 's what put 
his back up? * 

' Oh, they did that, but I think he *d been ready to play 
any dirty little trick right from the first. He isn’t a 
gentleman — never looked like one — and he isn’t even an 
ordinary decent business man. He ’s just an adventurer, 
trying his hand at anything for tuppence. No wonder he 
never stopped anywhere long — too crooked! But you see 
what he says there, that he encloses a little document that 
had — what is it?— escaped his memory. Well, there’s 
the little document, there — that statement of Mikorsky’s, 
dated when he was there, raising all the prices. There ’s 
the full list of 'em — up fifty to seventy per cent.' 

'But — but,’ Mr. Smeeth stammered, as he looked at this 
list, ‘we can’t be expected to pay these prices. We’ve 
already bought heavily on the old prices.* 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


420 

* Have we ? Golspie did the buying, and I can't find any 
acknowledgment from them.' 

‘Well, can't we cancel the last orders then, Mr. Dersing- 
ham ? I never heard of such a thing. It 's not reasonable. 
Here their prices have been up for weeks and weeks, and 
we 've been thinking we were buying at the old rates. 
They can't force us to take the stuff at these prices, 
surely.' 

' I don't know. That side of it doesn't matter, anyhow. 
The point is, Smeeth — don't you see? — whether we've 
bought the stuff or not, we 've sold it .' 

Mr. Smeeth did see; he saw with fatal clearness; and his 
dismay must have been written on his face. 

'Yes,' Mr. Dersingham continued, *we 've sold it, stacks 
and stacks of it, thousands of square feet, big orders, 
Smeeth, big orders, all those orders we paid Golspie that 
commission on. You might well look like that. I 've been 
feeling like that all day, even though I still hoped there 
might be a mistake — before that telegram came.' 

'But, Mr. Dersingham — it’s — it's ruination, sheer 
ruination.' 

‘And it 's damnably, damnably unfair, Smeeth. We 've 
simply been swindled. Listen, d' you think there 's any 
chance of us getting all those orders cancelled here? ' 

Mr. Smeeth thought for a minute, then slowly shook his 
head. ‘ We 've undertaken to deliver the stuff, Mr. Der- 
singham, and there 's no getting out of that. I mean to 
say, if our customers say "We want it," then they '11 have 
to have it, and they can compel us to let them have it at the 
price we sold it, or compel us to go out of business. No 
argument about that at all, sir.' 

4 What I 'm wondering is this, Smeeth. It 's not our 
fault this has happened. I mean to say, it's not the 
ordinary case of selling the stuff before you 've bought it, 
hoping for a fall in prices, and then getting nipped because 
the price goes up when you have to deliver the stuff. It 's 
nothing like that, you see. We 've been let down by sheer 
rotten trickery. Not our fault at all. Now I 'm wonder- 
ing if our customers would agree to cancel the orders if I 
explained the situation to them, told them straight out that 
Golspie was a wrong 'un and we 've been let down. It 's 
worth trying, isn't it? Where's that order book? I 



THEY GO HOME 


421 

want to see who are about the biggest buyers of these last 
lots that I can get hold of at once. What about Brown 
and Gorstein? They ’re not far away.' 

And they've bought as much as anybody/ said Mr. 
Smeeth. ‘We've a lot to deliver to them. You might 
get hold of Mr. Gorstein.' 

'I'll ring up and see if he's there.' And while he 
waited, receiver in hand, he added: ‘Jot down what Brown 
and Gorstein have bought, will you, Smeeth?' By the 
time Mr. Smeeth had done this, Mr. Dersingham had 
learned that Gorstein was still there and was willing to 
see him at once. 'I '11 go over at once,' said Mr. Dersing- 
ham. ‘ I '11 just tell my wife first not to expect me back in 
a hurry. I believe we were going out to play bridge with 
somebody. My hat! — I feel as much like playing bridge 
to-night as I do like — like — spinning tops.' 

When the other had finished his telephoning, Mr. Smeeth 
had the order book and some paper in front of him. ‘While 
you 're there, Mr. Dersingham, I '11 try and work out the 
whole thing on the new prices.' 

‘I was going to tell you to do that,' said Mr. Dersingham, 
as he took down his hat and coat. ‘Get it all worked out 
while I 'm up at Brown and Gorstein’s. God! — we 're in 
a mess. I *11 be back as soon as I can.' 

Left to himself, Mr. Smeeth did not think. He refused 
to think. He applied himself sternly to the task before 
him, and for the next quarter of an hour never looked up 
from his books and his calculations. He was not Herbert 
Norman Smeeth, but simply the master of the neat little 
figures, and he added and subtracted and multiplied them 
without letting his mind wander away from their austere 
but calculable world, in which he had spent so many 
pleasant hours. He had plenty to do. All the orders of 
the last few weeks, back to the early part of December, in 
fact, had to be estimated on the basis of these new prices, 
and he had to add the usual costs and then the commission 
already paid to Golspie. He did it with his usual neatness, 
accuracy, thoroughness, producing a statement that could 
be understood at a glance. At the end of quarter of an 
hour, the telephone rang and disturbed him, but it was not 
a call for them. Mechanically, then, he filled his pipe, and 
spent a minute or two listening idly to the various sounds 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


422 

that came from the steps outside, from Angel Pavement, 
from the City beyond, a sort of vague symphony, and the 
only one, it seemed, that he would hear that night. He 
put his pipe in his mouth unlit, and bent over his figures 
again. Time slipped away as the totals mounted up on 
the statement, and soon half an hour had gone. He 
turned now to other books, to the general financial side of 
the matter, estimating what they had in hand and what 
was due to them. 

Mr. Dersingham came bursting in, large and active, but 
a figure of misery. ' It 's no use, Smeeth. We 're abso- 
lutely done/ 

'What did Mr. Gorstein say? ' 

' I told them as much as I could, and they laughed at me 
they did, honestly they did, they just laughed at me. 
Pretended not to, pretended to be very sympathetic and 
all that, but I knew. That fellow Gorstein’s another rotter, 
if you ask me. Very sorry and all that, hard luck on us, 
but of course they 'd bought what we 'd offered them, and 
they'd undertaken to supply their customers and made 
contracts on what they 'd bought from us, and we 'd have 
to deliver, and no nonsense about it. And they practically 
told me that everybody else in the trade would say the 
same thing, but only be a bit more damned insolent about 
it. No, I see that now, plainly enough. There 's no 
getting out of it.' 

'But, Mr. Dersingham, it 's a terrible position we 're in, 
it really is.' 

‘Good God! man, you 've no need to tell me that. It 's 
the foulest mess I ever dreamed of, and all because of that 
dirty crook. Honestly, Smeeth, I don't pretend to be a 
bruiser or anything of that sort, but if I saw that chap now, 
I 'd go for him. I 'd either knock him down or he 'd have 
to knock me down. Have you been working it all out? 
What does it look like ? ' 

Mr. Smeeth now considered his totals and the full impli- 
cation of them for the first time. He handed the papers 
across the table. 

Mr, Dersingham, running a finger across his teeth and 
allowing his jaw to drop, stared at them for several minutes 
without saying a word. Then he queried one or two figures, 
and Mr. Smeeth worked them out again, for his benefit. 



THEY GO HOME 423 

The order book was referred to several times. But there 
was no escaping from those totals. 

'I Ve just been working out how we stand, too, Mr. 
Dersingham. I thought you 'd want to know now. This 
is the position, counting everything in/ 

They went over that now, spending about half an hour 
in what was mostly futile discussion, as Mr. Smeeth, sick at 
heart, knew only too well. 

‘It 's no good, Smeeth/ the other said finally, ‘there's 
no getting away from it. It was a tight squeeze paying 
that swine all that commission in advance, and now we 've 
got to sell every square foot of stuff at a loss, on all those 
orders.' 

‘ It 's a terrible loss. The business as it is will never 
stand it, Mr. Dersingham.' 

‘I know that. And what's left of the business, even 
supposing I could borrow enough to see me through this 
mess? Where should we be? Only back where we were 
before we began handling this stuff, before? Golspie came, 
doing just about enough trade to pay expenses, and on 
top of that I 'd be up to the neck in debt. I couldn't carry 
on a month. I 've borrowed as much as I can, and even if 
I could borrow any more, I wouldn't — it *s only throwing 
money away. Honestly, Smeeth, how can I go on? ' 

Mr. Smeeth looked through the papers again, though 
there was no real meaning in the glances he gave him. He 
was trying to think of a way out, but it was impossible to 
find one. 

'What are you going to do, then, Mr. Dersingham?' he 
asked, miserably. 

‘Nothing. Finish. What else can I do? I'll buy 
what I can of this lot, deliver it, and then finish. And if 
they bankrupt the firm, they bankrupt it, and there 's the 
end of it. If they don't, I close down and clear out, any- 
how, and that 's the end of it, too. I don't suppose it 's 
the first time a dam' fool's been robbed clean out of a 
business, is it? ' 

‘I don't know what to say, Mr. Dersingham.' And Mr. 
Smeeth didn't. He was staring at the opposite wall in 
utter dejection. 

‘ What 's the good of saying anything ? But what makes 
me sick is the way that rotter Golspie has cleared out ' 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


424 

'I thought at the time it was a bit fishy, sir, when he 
wanted all that commission in advance/ 

‘Well, if you thought so, why the devil didn't you say 
so at the time? No good saying so now/ 

‘I did say something at the time, Mr. Dersingham, I did 
really/ 

‘Well, I must say I don't remember you saying anything. 
Anyhow, it's too late now. You know, Smeeth, that 
fellow 's robbed me just as much as if he 'd broken into my 
flat — it 's worse, when you think of it. And there isn't 
even a charge against him. All he 's done is to collect 
some commission and keep a letter back. You can't go 
to the police about that. The swine! That's what 
maddens me. What's the time? Quarter-past eight? 
Come on, let 's get out of this/ 

They walked down the stairs and out of the building 
together. Across the way, the only sign of life came from 
the bar of the White Horse . ‘I don't know about you, 
Smeeth/ said Mr. Dersingham, stopping, ‘but I want a 
drink. It 's a long time since I wanted one so badly. You 
could do with a spot, couldn’t you? Of course you could. 
Let 's have one, while we can still pay for it.' 

The private bar was completely deserted, except for a 
long, grey cat that stretched itself arrogantly in front of 
the little fire. The barmaid came round the corner, swept 
away several glasses, polished a foot or two of counter, said 
‘Tom, Tom, Tom, Tom, Tom* to the cat, then smiled at the 
gentlemen in the way a lady ought to smile, and ‘Good 
evening. Nicer now, iserntit ? * 

‘Two double whiskies, please, and two small sodas/ said 
Mr. Dersingham. 

' Two doubles/ murmured the barmaid. 

Mr. Smeeth could not help being reminded of the time 
when Mr. Golspie had brought him in here and had insisted 
on his having a double whisky. That was the night when 
Mr. Golspie had told him that he ought to have a rise. 
Everything was going too wonderful that night. 

‘Here 's luck, Smeeth,' said Mr. Dersingham, raising his 
glass , 1 and I 'm sorry for your sake it 's turned out like this, 
though you 're not losing what I 'm losing, not by a long 
chalk. But here 's luck — here 's t o your next j ob, and I hope 
it 's a better one than Twigg and Dersingham ever gave you/ 



THEY GO HOME 425 

‘Thank you, Mr. Dersingham/ said Mr. Smeeth shyly. 
' And here 's luck to you too, sir * 

‘You 'd think that cat, to look at it/ said the barmaid, 
'was a good mouser if ever a cat was. Wouldn't you now? 
Well, it isn't. No good at all. Won't touch a mouse. 
Will you, Tom ? No, you won't, you lazy old rascal. Don't 
earn your keep at all, you don't. Come here, Tom. Tom, 
Tom, Tom.' 

‘I 'm going to try for a job out East as soon as I 've 
straightened things up,' said Mr. Dersingham confidentially. 
'No more City for me. I never did care for it. Not really 
my style at all, y' know, Smeeth. I always wanted to go 
out East. You get a gentleman's life out there. A man 
I know — he 's just retired and he 's a neighbour of mine — 
told me some time ago he could get me a good job out there 
any time. 1 shall have a shot at it.’ 

Mr. Smeeth nodded and looked gloomy. There was no 
job out East for him, and these remarks of Mr. Dersing- 
ham's suddenly opened out a vast, dreary prospect. At 
the moment, he preferred not to think about the future. 

‘ Look at him, the silly old thing/ said the barmaid, who 
had the long cat in her arms now. ‘Aren't you a silly old 
thing, Tom ? He 's got nice markings though, hasn't he ? 
Reg'lar, aren't they? Go on then, go down then, if you 
want to, Tom. There! Boo! Bool Just watch him. 
He can open the door by himself. Artful as anything, I 
can tell you.' 

Mr. Dersingham gulped down the rest of his whisky and 
soda. ‘ Rotten luck. The worst possible. Where I made 
the mistake though, Smeeth, was not trusting to what's-it 
— instinct, intuition, you know. About Golspie, I mean. 
I was trying to be the smart City bounder, with an eye for 
a tricky bit of business and nothing else — y' know, like that 
awful fellow, Gorstein, and all the rest of 'em. Not my 
style at all, really. I didn't like the chap and I ought to 
have known he 'd do me down. Never mind, he '11 come 
to a sticky finish before he 's done. And so will that 
daughter of his. You never met her, did you, Smeeth? 
Very good looking, in the film and chorus girl style, but a 
terrible little minx. You ought to hear my wife on Miss 
Golspie! She came to my place once — but never again, 
never again. That was a queer business, y' know, Smeeth, 



426 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

about Turgis and that girl, when Golspie came and said 
Turgis would have to be sacked because he 'd been up to 
some mysterious games with the daughter. I never really 
understood what it was all about — though I 'd like to bet 
the Golspie's daughter was up to her tricks there — she 
looked that sort/ 

‘I never understood that business/ said Mr. Smeeth 
mournfully. *1 wasn't properly told about it/ 

‘Neither was I, for that matter. But I didn't bother 
much, because I never thought that chap Turgis was much 
good, anyhow, and was rather glad to get rid of him. 
Thinking it over now, though, I feel a bit sorry for the 
poor devil. Have you heard anything about him, Smeeth ? ' 

‘Miss Sellers has seen him once or twice, I believe. I 
fancy she 's a bit sweet on him. He 's not got another job 
yet, of course, and it 's not likely he will for some time/ 
He breathed hard, like a man who wants to sigh but has 
forgotten how to do it, looked down at the remainder of 
his drink, and slowly finished it. 

‘Well, I 'd better be getting along/ said Mr. Dersingham. 
‘That drink 's made me hungry. I 'll stop at the club and 
see if I can get a bite. I might see a fellow there who could 
give me one or two tips about this miserable business. Then 
I '11 go home, and that 's the part I 'm not looking forward 
to, I can tell you. Are you going home now? ' 

‘Yes/ said Mr. Smeeth slowly, buttoning his overcoat. 
‘I 'm going home/ 


ii 

As her bus turned into that hive of buses in front of 
Victoria Station, Miss Matfield shivered a little. She was 
nervous; she was excited; and her mind was facing two 
different ways. She spent the next few minutes getting 
from the bus to the station, which was very crowded and 
week-endy, and then to the place where she had arranged 
to meet Mr. Golspie, which was on the departure side, 
between the bookstall and that large clock with four faces. 
Mr. Golspie was not to be seen. This did not surprise her, 
for she was rather early. She was somewhat relieved to 
find that he was not there. It left her with a welcome 



THEY GO HOME 427 

breathing space. She was by no means single-minded 
about this adventure. 

It had been planned, if a few hasty and last-minute 
questions and answers can be called planning, three days 
before, on Tuesday night, which was the last time she had 
seen him. He had not been to the office since and she 
had no message from him, but that did not worry her. She 
had a strong suspicion that he was going away very soon, 
but she did not know when he would be going and she did 
not believe that he knew. Last Tuesday, just before they 
parted, he had asked her once again to go away for the 
week-end with him, anywhere she pleased, and this time, 
moved obscurely by many different feelings and forces, 
something genuinely eager and passionate in the man’s 
voice, a sudden desire to clutch at experience, to throw 
herself upon life, a contempt for her qualms and misgiv- 
ings and timidities, she had agreed to go. An hotel on the 
Sussex coast she had once seen was to be their destination, 
and the time and meeting place were hastily settled. 
Several times since, she had been tempted to write to him or 
ring him up, to say that she had changed her mind. Her 
pride, however, would not let her do this. She had said 
she would go, and now she would carry it through. She 
had wanted adventure, and though she would not have 
admitted it, there was always a man in this adventure, 
and now that it offered itself and she had accepted it, she 
could not run away. Yet there was a creature in her, and 
not merely a brain phantom, but a creature that had some 
of her rich blood flowing through it, that very blood which 
this coarse, middle-aged man could so inspire that it 
dazzled and inflamed her, a shrinking and fastidious 
creature that cried to run away, to run away and hide. 
It protested against the shabbiness and furtiveness of this 
adventure, and pounced upon the sinister lack of fairness 
in it. It loathed the cheap imitation wedding ring that 
was now tucked away in her bag, a ring that was part of 
the adventure, and that had seemed rather a joke when it 
first had been mentioned last Tuesday. She had heard 
about these rings before, and they had always seemed 
rather a joke, perky glittering little stage properties in 
amusing escapades, and it was not difficult for her to force 
herself to see that ring in her bag in the same theatrical 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


428 

light; but, nevertheless, the protest was not silenced and 
the loathing remained. If Golspie had asked her to marry 
him, no matter if he had told her that they would have to 
settle in the most outlandish place, she would have agreed; 
but he had not asked her to marry him. Yet he wanted 
her, not idly either, and, when all was said and done, that 
was a heartening and exciting fact ; and after this, he might 
want her still more, the last traces of self-sufficiency in him 
(and he had appeared unusually self-sufficient at first, and 
that had made him all the more attractive) might vanish, 
and then — well, everything might be different. 

If you delight in movement and change, the appeal of 
a large railway station is irresistible; you are still in the 
dark cocoon of the city, but one end is splintering already 
and you can see the blue beyond; the rumbles and shrieks 
and snortings are only part of the tuning up; and even 
the smoky smell has the savour of adventure. There had 
been moments during the last two days when this week- 
end, this arrival at Victoria, had loomed in Miss Matfield's 
mind like some unusually desperate appointment at the 
dentist's, and at the thought of it something coldly writhed 
inside her. Now that she was here, however, she was less 
introspective and her spirits gradually rose. It was almost 
better that something extremely unpleasant should happen 
than that nothing at all should happen; and it was very 
unlikely that anything extremely unpleasant would happen. 
She responded to the lively and adventurous bustle of the 
station. As she strolled over to the bookstall, carrying 
her small suitcase, she felt tall, healthy, strong, a fine 
woman of the world. One or two middle-aged men had 
smiled in her direction and several young men had looked 
earnestly at her, all of which meant that she was looking 
her best. The bookstall offered her an almost unlimited 
choice of reading matter, light periodicals, heavy periodi- 
cals, books that were ‘amazing successes/ books that were 
‘very outspoken/ books that were simply ‘great bargains/ 
She did not accept any of them, but the knowledge that 
they were there somehow gave her pleasure. It was im- 
possible to resist a holiday feeling. The sight of all the 
fussy and bewildered people, of whom there were an un- 
usually large number, the people who went rushing up to 
any man in a railway uniform, who looked in despair at 



THEY GO HOME 429 

the notice-boards, who mopped their brows and snapped 
at one another, who blankly surveyed great mounds of 
luggage, who flitted like uneasy ghosts from one platform 
entrance to another, only brought her a pleasing sense of 
her own superiority. They were nothing to do with her; 
she was not behaving like that; and so she looked on, 
amused, contemptuous, failing to see in this spectacle of 
the harassed and inexperienced travellers any symbol of 
this life of ours. 

There were two trains, and they had hoped to catch 
the earlier one. It was now only a few minutes from the 
time of starting. She returned to her former place, nearer 
the clock, and looked about her anxiously. He would 
get the tickets, of course, before he came On to the main 
platform, so that there was still plenty of time for them to 
catch the train if he appeared at all. There seemed to be 
more and more people about, though round her there was 
a small clear space. It was just possible that he might have 
missed her. Only two minutes now. She hurried over to 
the entrance to No. 17 platform and looked over the barrier 
down the waiting train. Then she returned, even more 
hastily, to her place near the clock. From there she heard 
the train go out. 

It was annoying. They would have more than three- 
quarters of an hour to wait now. It was her turn to keep 
him waiting. Very deliberately, she made her way to the 
tea-room, which was not very full though it looked vaguely 
as if it had just been wrecked by a revolutionary mob, and 
she spent ten minutes over a cup of tea and a cigarette. 
She would have liked to have stayed longer, but it is almost 
impossible to linger successfully with only a sheet of glass 
between you and a host of trains and passengers. She tried 
to loiter on her way back to the four-faced clock and the 
bookstall, but an inner restlessness prevented her, and 
she arrived there as if her train might start any moment. 
He was not there. Now she began making little circular 
tours with the clock as their centre. After quarter of an 
hour of these, she returned to the meeting place and re- 
mained there, her suitcase at her feet, erect, motionless, 
sullen. She was there, and he must find her. People 
came and went, bought papers and books, looked at the 
clock, looked at the departure board, glanced at her; porters 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


430 

wheeled their loaded barrows and trucks at this side of her 
and that; the trains snorted and puffed and sent red gleams 
to the glass roof ; but now she paid no attention at all. She 
was tired of Victoria, tired of waiting. This time, when the 
later train was nearly due to start, she stayed where she 
was and made no attempt to discover if he was already on 
the platform. When the train had gone, she stood quite 
still for a minute or two longer, then walked away. 

She had to wait again before she could get a telephone 
call put through to his flat. The telephone boxes were in 
brisk demand. She knew his telephone number and knew, 
too, that the instrument at his flat, which had been out 
of order the week before, was all right now. But she would 
not have been surprised to find that there was no reply to 
her call, for she was sure at least that he would not be there. 
Something had gone wrong; and even now he was probably 
trying to get to Victoria. There was a reply, however, and 
it obviously came from a maid. 

‘Is Mr. Golspie there, please? ' 

‘No, he's not. He's gone. So has Miss Golspie. 
They 've both gone,' said the voice. 

'Gone? Do you mean — he 's out? ' 

'No, gone. Gone for good.' 

'But — I don't understand. Are you sure? I had an 
appointment with him to-night.' 

' All I know is — he 's gone, Miss Golspie too. They 've 
gone to South Africa or South America or one of them 
places. In a boat, I do know. I helped 'em to pack, and 
a job it was too, and a nice mess they 've left this place in, 
I can tell you. I 'm cleaning it up now, after 'em, 'cos 
they only took it furnished and I stayed on with the place. 
There was a gentleman came when I was having my dinner,' 
the voice continued, as if it was rather pleased to have a 
little chat with somebody, ‘and he wanted Mr. Golspie 
badly, but I couldn't tell him anything except they 'd 
gone, went this morning, luggage and everything, and you 
never saw such a pile.' 

‘ Did Mr. Golspie leave any message — for anybody? ' 

'No, he just went ' 

'All right, thank you,' said Miss Matfield, interrupting 
and then ringing off. 

He had gone, left the country, without even telling her 



THEY GO HOME 431 

he was going, without even telling her he could not keep 
this appointment at the station. He had simply tossed 
the week-end away, and her with it, as if it had been a 
crumpled bit of paper. If he had not forgotten all about 
it, then he had not cared enough to see her for the last 
time or even to send a message. And this was the man — 
oh, the humiliation of it all ! She left the station, burning 
with shame and resentment. An hour earlier she might 
have felt relieved if Mr. Golspie had come and told her 
that it would be impossible for them to go away this week- 
end. But she had waited there, suitcase in hand, that 
filthy little ring in her bag, had waited there, and all the 
time he was miles away, not caring if she spent the rest of 
her life standing in Victoria Station. Never before had she 
felt such bitter contempt for herself. She could have cried 
and cried, not because he had gone and she would probably 
never set eyes on him again, but because his sudden indif- 
ference, at this time of all times, left her feeling pitiably 
small and silly. The misery of it was like the onslaught 
of some unexpected, terrible disease. Her mangled pride 
bled and ached inside her, so that she felt feint. 

That was why she did not return, as a sudden impulse 
commanded her to do, to the station and take the first 
train anywhere, to get away for the week-end at any cost 
from London and the Club. She could not do it ; all energy 
and initiative were drained away; she was too tired. She 
found a No. 2 bus, climbed on top, and then watched, with 
smarting eyes that refused to see anything properly, the 
glitter and blue murk of half London go lumbering past, 
Hyde Park Comer, Park Lane, Oxford Street, Baker Street, 
Finchley Road, all a meaningless jumble of light and dark, 
offering nothing to Lilian Matfield, no more than if it had 
been some Chinese river flickering past on a cinema screen. 

Once in the Club, she hurried upstairs, as if she had 
stolen the suitcase she carried. Hastily, mechanically, 
she washed, tidied her hair, changed her dress, powdered 
her face, and then went down to the dining-room. She 
did not really want food, but something impelled her to 
throw herself back into the routine of the Club. But she 
was careful to find one of those nondescript tables for 
late-comers, at which there was little talk, and what talk 
there was merely the occasional impersonal remarks of 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


432 

acquaintances. She ate little, and the sight and smell of 
the food, the look of everybody there, the high chatter and 
clatter of the room, made her feel sick. Nevertheless, she 
stayed on, and had her coffee with the rest. When she 
got back to her room, she began examining all her clothes 
and grimly set aside some stockings to be mended. Then 
she remembered something. 

' Can I come in?' said Miss Morrison. 'Hello, Matfield, 
what on earth are you doing? Something desperate, by 
the look of you.* 

‘ Hello, Morrison. I was only throwing something away/ 
she replied, closing the window. Somewhere out there was 
a cheap imitation of a wedding ring. 

Miss Morrison, who was wearing bedroom slippers, con- 
trived to shuffle elegantly — for she never quite lost her slim 
elegance — into the room, and hoisted herself on to the 
bottom of the bed, resting her back against the wall. 1 Oh, 
by the way/ she cried, ‘you oughtn't to be here. Weren't 
you going away for the week-end? ' 

‘I was,' said Miss Matfield shortly, hanging a dress up, 
'but I changed my mind.' 

'Good!' And that was all Miss Morrison had to say 
about that. It was one of her virtues, as Miss Matfield 
had begun to notice, that she did not ask questions when 
they were obviously unwelcome, made no attempt, except 
in fun, to nose things out of you. Most girls at the Burpen- 
field, if you were on room-visiting terms with them, did 
not allow you to have any private life of your own. ‘I 
ought to have gone out to-night,' Miss Morrison continued, 
in her usual languid manner, ‘ but I can't bother to. I feel 
foul. I never remember feeling more completely foul, 
except when I 've had 'flu or something like that. I 'd 
go and see a doctor only I can't afford to, and then again I 
disapprove of the way we females run after doctors and 
worship them. Cadnam's just been raving to me about 
some doctor she 's just been to. "He 's fifty, of course, 
and heavily married," she said, "but the most marvellously 
attractive man, my dear." She went raving on and on. 

I think it 's revolting the way these young females adore 
their doctors and dentists. I refuse to join in, don't you? 
After that it '11 be vicars and curates and dear, dear doggies 
— vile! But, as I said before, I feel thoroughly ill. It 's 



THEY GO HOME 433 

partly the idiocy of my respected employer, who really is 
the silliest woman there ever was — she gets sillier — and 
then again it 's partly the time of year. Don't you honestly 
think this is the very, very foulest time of all the year? 
It 's such a long way from anything or anywhere interest- 
ing, isn't it? Just fiendishly dull. I don’t blame all those 
illustrated paper people — Lady Chagworth, Colonel Mush, 
and Friend — for going away and slacking about on the 
Riviera or in Madeira, or wherever it is they do go. I say 
"good luck to them!" — don't you? Though I must say 
it oughtn’t to be the same people who go every year and 
the same people who stay at home, like us, and push into 
buses on wet nights. They ought to change round a bit. 
Your turn this year. Our turn next year. That sort of 
thing.' 

‘I should think so,' said Miss Matfield, somewhat in- 
differently. She was still busy putting clothes away. ‘ I 
call it beastly unfair. I think I '11 turn Bolshie.' 

‘ I 've often thought of turning something* said Miss 
Morrison meditatively. ‘Have you got 3. cigarette, by 
the way ? ' 

‘Some over there somewhere. Can you reach over and 
get them? I '11 have one, too.' 

Having found the cigarettes, Miss Morrison handed one 
over, accompanying it with a curious glance. ‘ I went to 
that Chehov play last night. I didn't tell you, did I ? My 
dear, don't go. I wept and wept — yes, honestly I did. It 
was just like the Burpenfield with the lid off, really it was — 
awful! When I got back last night, I said to myself, "1 
can't bear it. I can’t bear it." ' 

‘ I think that 's stupid, Morrison,' said Miss Matfield, 
sitting in the only chair. 

‘What's stupid?' 

‘All that — about not bearing it and about the Club being 
the Chehov play. It 's not a bit like it.' 

'How do you know, my dear? You haven't seen the 
play.' 

‘ I 've read it.' 

'I don't suppose it 's the same, just reading it. I admit 
it 's not like this at all on the surface, but honestly it 's got 
the same what-is-it — atmosphere.' 

'It hasn't a bit, I tell you,’ said Miss Matfield, earnestly. 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


434 

‘And I really think it 's stupid talking like that about this 
place. It 's ridiculous — all silly exaggeration. When you 
talk like that, Morrison, you annoy me * 

'Since when, my dear? ' 

'Well, I 've made up my mind that it 's simply absurd, 
besides being terribly depressing, going about talking like 
that about the life we lead here. It makes it seem fifty 
times worse than it it. And, anyhow, it 's not bad really. 
It 's our own fault if it is. Yes, it is.' 

'My dear, you can't mean it.' 

'Yes, I do mean it/ 

Having said this, Miss Matfield put down her cigarette, 
looked at the floor for a minute, then quite suddenly and 
unaccountably burst into tears. 

'Sorry!' she cried, five minutes later, when it was all 
over. 'I 'm not going mad, though I dare say it seemed 
like it. I think — I *ve been feeling rotten too, all strung 
up, you know/ 

' My dear,' said Miss Morrison, who had been very tactful, 
'if I hadn't wept buckets last night at that play, I don't 
know what I 'd be doing to-night/ 

'Listen/ cried Miss Matfield, jumping to her feet and 
smiling damply. 'I 've made up my mind now. Yes, I 
have. It 's serious. Listen. I 'm going to work properly, 
and I 'm going to get a better job and make more money.' 

'You 're not going to leave your present job, are you? ' 

'The Lord forbid! If I did, the scheme wouldn't work 
at all. No, but I 'm going to tell them there isn't anything 
in the office, or connected with it, I won't and can't do, if 
they '11 only give me a chance. I 'm going to be really in 
business, not just sort of hanging on there. I 've got a 
jolly good chance because my firm 's very busy now and 
we 're short-handed, and the man who really sold all the 
veneers and inlays has just left us ' 

'Not the man you told me about, the fascinating one? ' 

'Yes/ Miss Matfield continued hurriedly. 'He's gone, 
and that means there '11 be an awful lot to do and they '11 
have to get new people. Well, I 'm going down to Angel 
Pavement in the morning — and I needn't go if I don't want, 
because I got the morning off when I thought I was going 
away for the week-end ' 

'Wait a minute. Do you mean to say that you've 



THEY GO HOME 435 

actually got the morning off and yet you ’re going all the 
same? You do? My dear, it sounds desperate/ 

‘Yes, I am. And I ’m going to Mr. Dersingham, and I 
shall tell him that I believe I could do anything that any 
man could do — and I don’t care if it ’s going round to the 
weirdest Jewy East End furniture places selling veneers — 
and that he ought to give me a chance. I believe he will 
too, particularly now, when business is so good and he *s so 
short of people. He could easily get another girl to do my 
typing, and that sort of thing, and I ’d go and do some 
real work and then ask for more money. Very soon, I 
might have a real job, with a decent salary and proper 
responsibility and everything/ 

‘Quite crazy! Though I believe you could do it, if 
they ’d give you a chance/ 

‘ They ’ll have to give me a chance, and I 'in sure I could 
do it/ 

She kept returning to the subject for $ie next hour, 
and then, when Miss Morrison had gone, she made up her 
mind all over again, and saw Messrs. Twigg and Dersing- 
ham growing more and more prosperous and herself, a real 
member of the firm, growing more and more prosperous 
with it. She arrived at Angel Pavement in a neat little 
car, and stepped out of it a cool, capable business woman, 
dressed with a certain austerity, but still attractive. Before 
she finally got to sleep, she had furnished not only her tiny 
flat in town, but also her little week-end cottage, which 
was the delighted admiration of her mother and other 
occasional guests. ‘Lilian, you are lucky,’ they cried; but 
she told them it was all the result of sheer hard work. This 
was the last dream of the day, and it was very pleasant. 
The dreams that followed in the night, the dreams that 
came without being asked, were curiously different, all dark 
and troubled, like the dreams of a child who has been hurried 
away to a strange place. 


hi 

Mrs. Dersingham, Miss Verever, and Mr. and Mrs. Pear- 
son were playing bridge upstairs at 34 Barkfield Gardens, 
in the Pearsons* drawing-room. Mr. Dersingham should 
P93* 



436 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

have been there, but he had telephoned to say that urgent 
business kept him at the office, so Miss Verever, who was 
usually abroad at this time of the year but had stayed in 
London because she was quarrelling with her solicitors, had 
taken his place. She was always ready to take anybody's 
place at any dining or bridge tables, though she never gave 
the least sign that she was enjoying herself. The card 
table was in the middle of the room, and there was only 
just space enough for it and its four players, in spite of 
the fact that this was a large room, larger than any of 
the Dersinghams’ downstairs. The trouble was that the 
Pearsons had so many things. They had furnished the 
room first with good solid late Victorian furniture, and then 
they had poured into it the glittering East, all the loot of 
Singapore. If the Federated Malay States had been de- 
stroyed by an earthquake and a great tidal wave, their life 
could have been reconstructed out of that room, which 
put any missionary exhibition to shame. Everybody 
looked out of place in it, and nobody more out of place 
than the Pearsons themselves. 

They were now playing their third rubber of auction. 
Mrs. Dersingham had Mr. Pearson for her partner, and 
they were not badly paired, for she was rather a bold, 
slap-dash player, while he was very dull, cautious, obvious, 
though he always tried to give the impression of immense 
cunning. Nobody believed in this cunning of his except 
his wife, who would shake her mysterious dark curls at 
him and girlishly protest against his sinister subtlety. 
'Isn't he dreadful?' she would say, after Mr. Pearson, 
with much stroking of his chin and narrowing of his eyes, 
had succeeded in some commonplace finesse. Mrs. Pear- 
son, though she had been sitting at bridge tables for years, 
was one of those cheerfully bad players who continually 
ask for and receive advice, but have not the slightest in- 
tention of improving their play. Probably she only saw 
the cards as so many vague pieces of pasteboard, and what 
was real to her was simply the social scene, the faces 
round the green cloth and the pleasant chatter between 
games. If somebody had suggested playing Snap with the 
cards or telling fortunes with them, she would have been 
delighted, but as people seemed to prefer bridge, whether 
in Singapore or in London, she gladly made one at the 



THEY GO HOME 437 

table. And if all Barkfield Gardens had been combed, it 
would have been impossible to find a worse partner for Miss 
Verever, who played a good, keen, close, give-no-quarter 
game, and loathed all idle chatterers at the table, all idiots 
who would not get trumps out, all the fools who clung to 
their wretched aces, all the witless monsters who said, 
‘Have you seen her lately? I haven't seen her for weeks 
and weeks. Let me see, what are trumps? * Mrs. Pearson 
combined smilingly every fault in bridge-playing known to 
Miss Verever, and Miss Verever's glances and tone of voice, 
queer and disturbing at any time, were now more queer 
and disturbing than ever, so that Mrs. Dersingham felt 
quite frightened and wished she had never asked her to 
take Howard's place. On Mrs. Pearson herself, however, 
these very peculiar glances, these biting accents seemed to 
have no effect. 

‘Well,' said Mr. Pearson, picking up his pencil, ‘that 's 
three down, doubled — three hundred to us. Simple 
honours to you, eighteen. Didn’t do badly that time, eh, 
partner? Must make something while we can. Tee-tee- 
tee-tee-tee.' 

‘Isn't he dreadful?' cried Mrs. Pearson. 'And you’re 
nearly as bad, my dear, you 're encouraging him. You 
see what it is, playing against my husband, Miss Verever. 
He 's a dreadful man. Never mind, we '11 do better next 
time, won't we?' 

‘But was it necessary to go Three Spades? ' Miss Verever 
inquired bitterly. 

‘Well, wasn't it? Oh, do tell me if it wasn't. When 
you 'd gone One, you see, and I had some spades, I thought 
we might win the rubber if we played the spades. If you 
think I did anything wrong, Miss Verever, don't be afraid 
of telling me, because I know you 're ever so much better 
than I am. Should I have played that king first? ' 

Miss Verever drew a deep breath, but Mrs. Dersingham 
was too quick for her. ‘ Oh, don't let 's have post-mortems,' 
she cried. ‘Whose deal is it? Mine, isn't it?' 

‘I suppose Mr. Dersingham will come when up he gets 
back, won't he?' said Mrs. Pearson, who never failed to 
snatch at any little opportunity for a chat. ‘ He 's late, 
isn't he? It must be so tiring for him, poor man. We 
know what it is, don't we? ' 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


438 

‘We do/ replied her husband. 'At least I do, my dear. 
Tee-tee-tee-tee-tee. ' 

‘He used to work terribly late sometimes out in Singa- 
pore/ Mrs. Pearson explained. ‘Night after night, some- 
times in the hot season, too/ 

' Couldn't grumble though/ said Mr. Pearson. ‘ It meant 
that business was good/ 

‘Yes, of course, that 's what I feel/ said Mrs. Dersing- 
ham, pausing in her dealing. 'I suppose they've had a 
sudden rush or something.' 

‘That's splendid, isn't it?' cried Mrs. Pearson. ‘I do 
like to hear of anybody I know doing so well. So many 
people don't now, do they? ' 

‘It 's made a great difference to Howard, being so busy/ 
said Mrs. Dersingham, still with the cards motionless in 
her hand. ‘ He really likes being in the City now. He was 
getting very depressed about it some time ago. Now let 
me see ' 

'The next card should be mine,' said Miss Verever 
coldly. 

'Oh, should it? That 's all right, then.’ And she con- 
tinued dealing. 

‘Well, I didn't want to say anything at the time, my 
dear/ Mrs. Pearson began, but she was cut short. Mrs. 
Dersingham looked up to see Miss Verever, on her right, 
giving her a terrible glance, and so she hastily declared 
'Pass/ 

'But I thought he seemed rather depressed about it, 
too/ Mrs. Pearson continued. ‘About six months ago, 
wasn't it ? ' 

'One Heart / said Miss Verever, quietly, but with a fear- 
ful intonation. * One Heart.* 

‘Oh, dear, have you started bidding already? How 
quick you are with your cards!' Mrs. Pearson began 
sorting hers in a frantic fashion. ‘Did you say One 
Heart? You did, didn't you? Well, after last time, I 
shall say — nothing.' 

‘But it 's not your turn to say anything,' Mr. Pearson 
pointed out. ‘In this game, your husband for once gets 
a chance to speak. And I say — One No Trumps. Yes, 
this is where your husband 's allowed to speak, my dear. 
Tee-tee-tee-tee-tee/ 



THEY GO HOME 439 

They were a game all in this rubber, so Miss Verever 
struggled up to Three Hearts, but her opponents went 
Three No Trumps, got them, won the rubber, and put 
her down eight hundred points. 

‘Is there time for another rubber? # said Mrs. Pearson, 
who was always quite willing to go on playing, perhaps 
because she never really started. 

‘I hardly think there is/ said Miss Verever, with one of 
her peculiar smiles. 

'No, let 's stop now/ cried Mrs. Dersingham. 

‘Somebody owes me four and ninepence/ Mr. Pearson 
pointed out. 

‘Listen to him! Isn't he really a dreadful man when 
he plays this game. I believe I 've lost four and nine — 
or is it five and nine?' Mrs. Pearson shook her curls at 
the score. ‘But I refuse to pay you anything, so there!' 

‘ Tee-tee-tee-tee-tee.' 

‘Well, I suppose I must pay my debts/ siid Miss Verever, 
looking at her score as if it was composed of something 
filthy, then glancing round without removing all the last 
expression from her face. ‘ I pay you, I think, my dear. I 'm 
afraid — yes, I 'm afraid — I shall have to ask you for change/ 

‘It doesn't matter,' said Mrs. Dersingham hastily. ‘I 
haven't got any change.' 

‘Please remind me then, the next time/ Miss Verever 
said this as if they would soon be meeting in some torture 
chamber. 

Somebody had arrived. It must be — it was — Mr. Der- 
singham. He came forward, blinking a little. His wife 
did not like the look of him. He was flushed and rather 
untidy. 

Mrs. Pearson rushed at him. ‘Come along, you poor, 
poor man! Sit down here. Make yourself comfortable. 
You 've been working all this time while we 've been en- 
joying ourselves. Walter, give poor Mr. Dersingham a 
drink this minute. I 'm sure you 'd like one, wouldn't 
you?' 

Mr. Dersingham said that he would, and the next minute 
he was taking a good swig of a large whisky and soda. 
When he put the glass down he caught his wife's eye, and 
for a moment he just stared at her. She liked the look of 
him now less than ever. To begin with, this was by no 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


440 

means the first large whisky he had had that night. She 
saw that at once. But that was not all. There was some- 
thing wrong. She glanced round and saw Miss Verever 
staring at him, and decided immediately that the sooner 
Miss Verever left them the better. She did not mind much 
about the Pearsons, who were kind and homely people, 
but she did not want Maud Verever to see or hear anything. 
She was about to suggest that they must go, when Mr. 
Pearson spoke. 

'Had a long day, Dersingham, eh?' said Mr. Pearson, 
his cheeks wobbling sympathetically. ‘We were just talk- 
ing about it. I know what it is. I 've had these rushes, 
you know, working half the night — in the hot season too, 
not a breath of air. Takes it out of you, I 'll tell you. 
Still, it's good for business, isn’t it? Better than the 
other way round, eh? Tee-tee-tee-tee-tee.' 

'I think I really ought to be going now,' said Miss Ver- 
ever, with one of her dreadful smiles. 

'Enjoyed yourself?' said Mr. Dersingham. 

She started back. 'Oh — of course,' she replied, keeping 
her eyes fixed on him. 

‘Good. I 'm glad to hear it. I like to hear of anybody 
enjoying themselves, and specially you, Miss Verever.' 

There was something very extraordinary about this, 
but Miss Verever did not care to stop and investigate it. 
She began saying good night. Mrs. Dersingham said that 
they must go too, but Mr. Dersingham refused to stir, so 
Miss Verever left by herself, though Mrs. Dersingham 
accompanied her down the stairs. 

‘Howard doesn't seem to be very well to-night, does 
he? ' said Miss Verever, when they reached the hall below 
in the Dersingham half of the building. 

'He 's tired, that 's all. I don’t think he 's very well. 
He 's been working tremendously hard. It 's terribly 
tiring working late like this down in the City.' 

'I suppose it is.' And it would be impossible to cram 
a larger amount of dubiety into four words than Miss 
Verever did into those four. 

'Of course it is,' cried Mrs. Dersingham, a trifle im- 
patiently. ' You just try it and see.' 

'Why, have you tried it, my dear? If you have, it 's 
news to me. However, I hope Howard's better soon. 



THEY GO HOME 441 

He shouldn't tire himself out like that. It must be very 
bad for him. Don't you think so? Well, it was very 
nice of you to ask me to make the four up and play with 
Mrs. Pearson. Good-bye, my dear.' 

Mrs. Dersingham hurried back to the Pearsons, slightly 
alarmed and considerably annoyed. It looked as if How- 
ard had not been kept late at the office at all, but had 
sneaked off to his club, where he had had more drinks than 
were good for him. There was always just a little, a little, 
danger of that with Howard. She found him sitting with 
his legs stretched out straight in front of him, listening to 
the Pearsons, who were still talking about Singapore. 

‘Taking it all round, y' know, the good with the bad/ 
Mr. Pearson concluded, ‘ it 's not such a bad life out there, 
though it 's not so good as it was. It isn't anywhere in 
the East. Still, even so, I believe if I 'd my time over 
again, I 'd go out there again, I really believe I would.' 

‘Good!' said Mr. Dersingham, with a kind of dreary 
solemnity. ‘All right then, Pearson, what about that job 
out there you promised to get me? ' 

‘ Any time, any time ! Tee-tee-tee-tee*tee. When would 
you like it ? Tee-tee-tee. ' Mr. Pearson evidently regarded 
this as a great joke. 

‘You can start getting it for me now, old man.’ 

Mrs. Pearson joined in the joke. ‘You'd better be 
getting your clothes ready, my dear,' she told Mrs. Der- 
singham, who smiled, though not very brightly. She did 
not see anything very funny in all this, and her husband was 
behaving very stupidly. It was time she got him away. 

[I 'm serious, y’ know,* he declared now, with the same 
dreary solemnity. ‘I'm not joking. You get me that 
job out there as soon as you can. I 'm serious.' 

‘That's right. So are we. When would you like it 
then ? Tee-tee-tee-tee-tee. ' 

Mr. Dersingham drained his glass, then examined what 
was left in it, the last golden drops, with a thoroughness 
that suggested he was conducting a chemical experiment. 

‘We really must go, yes, really we must/ cried Mrs. 
Dersingham, with a forced brightness; and in less than two 
minutes she had said all there was to say and had hustled 
her husband and herself out of the room. There was no 
fire in the drawing-room below, but there was the whitening 



44 2 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

ruin of one in the dining-room, and immediately he 
stumped in there in a heavy sort of way and sat down. 
She walked in after him, but did not sit down. 

‘I 'm going to bed/ she announced coldly. 

‘Just a minute/ he said, in a muffled voice. 

‘I prefer to go to bed. I 'm tired, even if you 're not.' 
And she turned away. 

‘No, don't go/ he cried, quite sharply now, with hardly 
anything of that thickness in his voice that had been there 
before. ‘You mustn't, Pongo. I've got something to 
tell you.' 

She closed the door and came back. ‘Pongo' was his 
old special silly delightful name for her, and even now, 
when she was annoyed with him, when he was a large, 
pink, sagging creature, whose every stupidity she knew by 
heart, when he was sitting there, flushed and thick with 
whisky, not at all the sort of man she ever imagined she was 
marrying, a hundred times less attentive and considerate 
and clever and courageous, even now, the sound of that 
‘Pongo' gave her a little thrill. She was annoyed with 
herself for feeling it. If he imagined he was going to be 
forgiven at once, simply because he had called her by that 
name, he was sadly mistaken. 

She took up a position on the other side of the hearth, 
and stood looking down on him. ‘ I should think you have 
something to say ! Have you been to the club ? ' 

He nodded and waved an impatient hand. ‘That was 
nothing/ he muttered. 

‘No, but if you must pretend you have to work late and 
then you go on to the club and fuddle yourself with drinks, 
you might at least have the sense to keep out of the way, 
instead of barging in like that and behaving so stupidly. 
No, Howard, I 'm really disgusted. You know I 'm not 
silly about drinking, as some women are. But there 's a 
limit. I believe you 're drinking a jolly sight too much 
these days, a lot more than is good for you. Yes, I mean it. 
Anybody could see what was the matter with you to-night, 
up there.' 

‘Oh, could they? ' He gave a little laugh. 

‘Yes, of course they could.' 

'Well, believe me, my dear, they couldn't. Not one of 
'em. Not you, even. No, not you.' 



443 


THEY GO HOME 

' Oh, don't be silly, Howard.' 

‘I 'm not being silly. I wish to God I was. You know 
when I asked Pearson about that job? I suppose you 
thought I was being funny then, didn't you?' 

'I didn't think you were being particularly tunny/ 
she told him, 'though you obviously thought you were. 
If you want to know what I thought, it was that you were 
just being rather stupid.' 

‘Well, I wasn’t, Pongo,' he said quietly. ‘I was quite 
serious. No, listen. We 're absolutely done — I mean the 
firm, Twigg and Dersingham— completely finished.* 

'Howard, you don’t mean it?' 

*Yes, I do. That's what kept me to-night. I had a 
drink or two just because I felt played out, and I suppose 
I did show it — sorry about that — but I 'v0 had a hell of a 
day. Golspie's cleared out and left us 

‘But you told me the other day that even if Golspie did 
go, it wouldn't matter and you 'd arranged everything so 
that you could do without him.' 

4 1 know, but the rotten swine did me down ' 

‘But how? I don't understand. Howard, you don't 
really mean it 's as serious as all that ? The firm can go 
on, can't it? ' 

He shook his head, and kept his face turned away. 
He looked like a great foolish baby. She swept down 
on him. ‘Tell me what's happened. Why didn't you 
tell me at once? I 'm sorry I was cross with you. I 
didn’t know it was anything serious — naturally. Now 
tell me.' 

He told her the whole wretched story. 

‘But do you mean to say that brute has gone and you 
can't do anything, anything at all? But it 's ridiculous. 
Can't you tell the police ? Why, it 's just as bad as burglary 
or swindling. It is swindling. But I knew, I knew all 
the time that something would happen because of that 
man. He hated us after that night he came here and I 
lost my temper with that vile little minx of a daughter. 
I felt all the time he did. I told you to get rid of him, 
didn't I? Oh, Howard, you have been stupid. Yes, you 
have. I '11 never believe in you again as a business man. 
You used to tell me I didn't understand about these things, 
but I 'm sure I understand about people — and that 's the 
*P93» 



444 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

main thing — better than you. But what 's going to happen 
now?* 

1 1 don’t know/ he mumbled miserably, and he explained 
as best he could the position they were in. As she listened, 
she suddenly saw the four walls enclosing them, the table 
and chairs and sideboard, everything in sight, no longer 
as solid objects, fixed, rooted in a secure existence, but as 
things brittle as glass, unstable and wavering as water. 
Nor did her imagination stop there. It explored the whole 
maisonette, the drawing-room, the kitchen below, the 
nursery and bedrooms, and discovered nothing substantial 
there, except the two children asleep upstairs and a few 
personal possessions that had long ceased to be mere things. 
She realized now, with a shock of dismay, that something 
absurd and fantastic could happen in Angel Pavement, far 
away, that could change all this. Their life here in Bark- 
field Gardens, not their personal life, but everything else, 
all the cleaning and cooking and shopping and visiting, was 
a mere candle-flame — one puff of wind, a wind that came 
from nowhere, and it was gone. She understood how 
millions of people live. It was a moment of revelation. 

‘What are we going to do?' she asked. 

‘I don*t know yet/ he replied wearily. ‘Give me time. 
I haven't had a chance to think yet. Hang it all, this has 
all been dropped on me like a ton of bricks. God! — I 'm 
tired.' 

He sounded helpless, looked helpless. Her mind began 
working furiously now, and the effect, after months and 
months of stagnation, of pretending and dreaming and 
vague discontent, was curiously exhilarating. ‘Do you 
think Mr. Pearson could get you a job out East? * 

‘No, I don't.' 

‘But why? You haven't asked him properly. He 
doesn't know you want one — if you really do want one, and 
I 'm not sure about that/ 

‘ I know he doesn't, my dear. But I 'm sure when he 
does, he *11 change his tune. I felt that when he was talk- 
ing to-night. It 's all right,* he added bitterly, as if he had 
suddenly discovered what the world was like and what men 
were made of, ‘while it *s still a joke. The minute he finds 
I *m serious, he *11 pull a long face. I don't mean he *s not 
a decent chap and all that. But he thinks he 's talking to 



THEY GO HOME 445 

a prosperous business man who doesn't really want a job. 
That 's the difference.' 

'I must have some tea,' she announced. ‘It 's no good, 
we must talk it over — if I went to bed I shouldn't sleep a 
wink — and if we 're going to stay up, I must have some tea. 
I '11 go down and make some. No, I can do it by myself. 
You stay here, and, Howard, do, do try and think of some- 
thing. Try and find out how much money we '11 have left 
— and everything.' 

When she returned with the tea, he was still sitting in the 
same huddled fashion. ‘Listen, I 've been thinking,' she 
began, almost gaily. But seeing him there, a large 
melancholy heap of man, she put down the tray, came 
across, pushed him back in his chair, and stood looking 
down at him, her hands still on his shoulders. 

‘Do you love me? ' she asked. 

He found this question as difficult as ever, but this time 
there was none of that masculine impatience or grinning 
tolerance. ‘As a matter of fact, I do,' he told her in a 
shamefaced mumble, ‘ but I don't feel this is the time to 
say so.' 

‘ Of course it is. Why not ? ' 

‘Well, I 've let you down. I 've let you down badly. 
I 've been a fool. I '11 admit I have. But I never liked 
the business, you know that, don’t you? If it hadn't been 
for that cursed War, I 'd never have gone into it. Not my 
style at all. I always hated it really — Angel Pavement 
and all those damned furniture places and sniffling East End 
Jews, and the whole thing. I 've tried my best, but it 's 
always gone against the grain. I 'm not excusing myself, 
mind, though honestly I think anybody might have been 
let down the same way by that artful devil. Smeeth — and 
he 's been in business all his life — never had a suspicion. 
He was more surprised than I was. And a fellow I talked 
to at the club said he 'd never heard of such a thing, said I 
couldn't be blamed at all. But there it is. What bothers 
me is that there *s some of your money gone, too. I 'm 
sorry, Pongo. I seem to have made a mess of it.' 

'I have some money left, though.' 

‘Not much,' he told her gloomily. ‘About twelve 
hundred, perhaps. No, not quite that.' 

‘ Well, that 's something, isn't it ? It 's quite a lot really. 



446 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

And after all you 've had very good business experience 
now. Then — you remember what Uncle Phil said? Just 
a minute, I 'll pour out the tea. Yes, you must have some.' 
She did not sound at all depressed. 

She was not depressed. In a few weeks, she might be 
miserable — she knew that too ; she seemed to know every- 
thing to-night — but now, at this moment, she might have 
just had good news instead of very bad. Unlike her 
husband, who appeared to be only half the man he usually 
was, a listless lump, she felt twice her customary self. The 
footlights had blazed out, the curtain had shot up, and she 
had responded at once to the call of the drama. But there 
was more in it than that. She was no longer playing and 
pretending in the background. The situation, leaving him 
crushed, challenged her, and there was something exhilarat- 
ing in accepting the challenge. Everything was suddenly 
real and exciting. Plans by the score, some of them bom 
of old idle day-dreams, were stirring in her mind, and now 
while he listened, sometimes shaking his head, sometimes 
looking at her hopefully, they came tumbling out. ‘Of 
course, we'll give this place up as soon as we can — we 
ought to get a decent premium too, look what we Ve spent 
on the decoration — and then I 'm sure mother would take 
the children for a few months. . . 


IV 

Yes, Mr. Smeeth was going home. It never occurred to 
him to go and hear what was left of the concert. He had 
done with Brahms & Co. for a long time, perhaps for ever. 
As he waited for his tram, he remembered that tune again — 
Ta turn ta ta turn turn — and now it seemed like something 
that was going on a long, long way off, like a birthday party 
in Australia. He said good-bye to that tune. As the 
tram went lumbering and groaning up the City Road, he 
said good-bye to many things. 

He was feeling rather queer. He had missed his usual 
evening meal and was empty; that double whisky had had 
its effect; there was undoubtedly a pain somewhere in his 
side; and then of course there was the shock of the bad 
news. He had for years moved gingerly, apprehensively. 



THEY GO HOME 


447 

through a world in which the worst might happen at any 
moment. The worst had happened. He could have said 
to himself, with satisfaction: ‘What did I tell you?’ Per- 
haps there ought not to have been any shock. But it was 
not as simple as that. He had never expected to be hurled 
out of his job in this fashion. He had always seen danger 
coming from many quarters, but nevertheless this blow 
had arrived from quite an unexpected quarter. The more 
he thought about it, the angrier he grew. His anger was 
not directed against Mr. Dersingham, not even against 
Golspie, but against the whole world, the very nature of 
things. 

You go on for years and years building up a position for 
yourself until at last you have a place of your own, a little 
world of your own, in which the figures do what you tell 
them to do, the books reveal their secrets, the fellows at the 
bank say ‘ Good morning, Mr. Smeeth,* arid everything is 
snug and sensible. Then a chap turns up from nowhere, 
looks at a trade directory and happens to choose your firm, 
wanders into Angel Pavement, and then, in less than six 
months 1 time, without your having any hand or say in it, 
he blows you clean out of it all, without even knowing or 
caring a thing about it. You are quietly finishing off for 
the day, and then suddenly— bang ! What was the good 
of trams going up and down the City Road and conductors 
taking fares and nobody smoking inside or spitting on top 
under penalty of a fine ; what was the good of having a City 
Road at all and lighting it with street lamps and opening 
shops and sending policemen to walk up and down it ; what 
was the good of paying rates and taxes and shaving yourself 
and seeing that you had a clean collar and going round to 
doctors and dentists and reading the newspapers and voting, 
if this is what could happen any minute ? My God l— what 

was the good of it all ? ... t 

This blanched middle-aged man, sittmg m a comer of 
the moving tram, an unlighted pipe trembling beneath his 
grey moustache, the wrinkles on his face deeper than ever, 
peered through his glasses now at the familiar panoramaof 
the North London roads and saw not a glimmer of it. His 
gaze was really fixed on the crazy structure of things, and 
of that he could make neither head nor tail. He was shak- 
ing a little, but not with fear, but with indignation. For 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


448 

years there had been a great shadow haunting and terrify- 
ing him, for he had seen all the little lighted things of his 
life menaced by it. Now the lights had gone, blown out; 
he sat in the shadow itself ; the tram was crawling through 
it; the Stoke Newington Road was in it; and all his fear 
had been used up before by that shadow, when he had been 
a man who had something precious to lose. Now he had 
lost it. In a week or two, he would have to start again, 
and at a time when even the boys were lining up in their 
hundreds for a chance of a mere beginning at ten shillings 
a week. It wasn't good enough. That was the phrase he 
used, the first that sprang into his mind, and he repeated it 
over and over again with tremendous emphasis. ‘Not 
good enough/ he said as he left the tram. ‘Not good 
enough/ as he made his way to Chaucer Road, ‘not good 
enough/ 

It was only too evident, he told himself grimly, that they 
were not expecting him back so soon at 17 Chaucer Road. 
Everything seemed to be in full swing there. You might 
have thought somebody had just been left a fortune. He 
heard a great noise coming from the front room, and he 
saw a light in the dining-room. He chose the dining-room, 
and found George there, tinkering about with the wireless 
set. 

‘Who's in there?' asked Mr. Smeeth. 

‘The Mitty crowd,' said George, with a tiny grin. ‘I 
came in here out of the way. I 've had enough of that lot. 
Mitty owes me a quid, too. He 's no good.' He looked 
curiously at his father. ‘Anything up, dad? ' 

‘You got anything to do yet, George? ' 

‘Not yet. I thought I was on to something to-day, but 
it was no go. I 'm going round to see a chap to-monw 
morning, big garage up at Stamford Hill. Why? Any- 
thing wrong?' 

‘Yes. I look like being out of a job within the next fort- 
night, and you know what that means.' 

It was not the tragedy to George that it was to his father, 
not merely because George was much younger, but also 
because his whole outlook was different, for he lived in a 
newer world in which jobs came and went and nobody 
troubled to spend years consolidating a position. Never- 
theless, the youth had sufficient imagination to realize 



THEY GO HOME 449 

what this meant to his father. 'I 'm sorry about that, dad 
— by gosli, I am. Rotten luck, isn’t it? How 'd it hap- 
pen ? They 'd never sack you, would they ? Has the firm 
gone broke?’ 

1 That 's it. Try and get something as soon as you can, 
George. You know how we ’ll be fixed.' 

'Don't worry, dad, I '11 get something soon, something 
good, too. Edna's not earning anything now, either, is 
she? She 'd better make another start, too, hadn't she? ' 

'I '11 attend to that. We 'll all have to make another 
start now, if you ask me,’ said Mr. Smeeth grimly. They 
looked at one another, with approval on both sides, in 
silence for a moment. They could hear sounds of merri- 
ment from the other room. 'Seem to be enjoying them- 
selves in there,' said Mr. Smeeth, his temper rising. 

George came nearer. ‘Dad, boot 'em out. I would if 
it was my house. I told mother so too—' 

‘Taking something on yourself, boy, aren't you, these 
days?' 

‘Well, I did. I can't stand that lot That's why I 
came in here.' 

Mr. Smeeth nodded. ‘That 's just what I 'm going to 
do, George. I want some peace and quietness to-night, 
and I 'm going to have it.' He walked out, and his son 
followed him. 

The front room was just as it had been the first time the 
Mitty family visited them. There were only five people in 
it, Mitty and his wife and daughter, Mrs. Smeeth and Edna, 
but it seemed quite crowded and as thick, hot, and smelly, 
as if people had been eating, drinking and smoking in it for 
weeks. It made Mr. Smeeth feel very angry and disgusted. 

Mrs. Smeeth stared at him, and looked uneasy. ‘ Hello, 
dad,* she cried. ‘I didn’t expect you back so soon.' 

‘So it seems.' 

'Didn't you go to the concert? ' 

Fred Mitty, very flushed, was about to help himself from 
a bottle that stood, with other bottles, glasses, and some 
cake and biscuits, on a little table in the centre of the room. 
He was leaning forward, but straightened himself when he 
saw Mr. Smeeth standing there. ‘ Thought you was having 
some classical music to-night, pa,' he roared. 'Gave it a 
miss, eh? 9 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


450 

Mr. Smeeth advanced into the room, breathing hard. 
He looked at Mitty. ' I 've been working hard/ he said 
pointedly, 'and I want some peace and quietness now. So 
I 'll say good night/ 

'What d' you mean, dad? * cried Mrs. Smeeth. 

But the irrepressible Fred could not resist this. 'Well, 
night-night, pa/ he yelled, ' if you 're going to bed. Don't 
let me keep you.' He looked round with a grin, asking for 
applause, and got it from the two girls, who giggled. Then 
he made a move towards the bottle again. 

'I 'm not going to bed, just yet/ said Mr. Smeeth, his 
voice trembling. 'But you 're going home. That 's what 
I meant.' 

'Here, half a minute, dad.' Mrs. Smeeth 's voice rose in 
indignation. ‘ What a way to talk ! ' 

'I should think so indeed,' cried Mrs. Mitty, sitting up 
sharply. 

'For the more we are too-gether/ Fred sang, as his 
hand closed round the whisky bottle, 'the merrier we 
will bee-yer.' 

The fuse had been burning briskly for some time, and 
now its travelling spark reached the explosive. Mr. Smeeth 
blew up. 'Get out,' he screamed at Mitty. 'Get out of 
here. Go on. Get out.' 

‘That 's the stuff/ shouted George from the doorway. 

But that scream was not enough for such an explosion 
of wrath. Two seconds later, Mr. Smeeth had flung down 
the little table and sent whisky and port and dirty glasses 
and cake and biscuits and oranges flying about the room. 
All was roaring chaos, with Fred Mitty shouting, the two 
wives screaming, Dot Mitty shrieking with laughter, Edna 
bursting into tears, George charging forward, and Mr. 
Smeeth standing in the middle, bellowing and stamping 
among the ruins. All the others jumped up and there 
was a pushing and jostling and Mr. Smeeth lost his eye- 
glasses and had no hope of finding them in the scrimmage. 
Nothing could be plainly heard in the din, and now, for 
Mr. Smeeth, robbed of his glasses, nothing could be plainly 
seen. His wife seemed to be shaking his arm and shrieking 
at him; Mrs. Mitty seemed to have hurled herself at Fred, 
to prevent further violence; and George appeared to be 
taking a hand in all the proceedings. But in another 



THEY GO HOME 45* 

minute, he was alone in the room, and all the others seemed 
to be talking at the top of their voices outside. Feeling 
shaky, he made a step or two towards a chair, and trod on 
some glass. His own eyeglasses were still on the floor some- 
where, and no doubt somebody had trodden on them. He 
collapsed into the chair, and in a dazed fashion removed a 
strange soggy substance from his left bootsole. It was 
what had once been a very generous slice of sandwich cake. 
Then a piece of broken glass, a jagged fragment of tumbler, 
cut his hand. He felt ill. It would not have been very 
difficult for him to have been sick on the spot. The sound 
of the voices outside did not abate for several minutes, but 
he stayed where he was. They could argue it out between 
them, could say and do what they liked; he didn't care. 

The door had been left open, and he heard the Mitty 
family go, and then he heard George say something to 
Mrs. Smeeth and Edna. The three of them went into the 
dining-room and closed the door behind them, but the 
sound of their voices, raised in heated discussion, came to 
him in his arm-chair. He had groped about a little with 
the hand that was not cut, but all he had found were two 
biscuits and these he had eaten in that mechanical fashion 
in which biscuits are nearly always eaten. The voices were 
lower now and suggested that their owners were no longer 
merely shouting at one another, but were really talking. 
More minutes passed, and then he heard Edna go upstairs 
to bed. Then, after a short interval, during which he 
listened intently, shakily, to every sound, his wife came 
into the room. She did not burst in, as he had expected her 
to do ; she came in quietly and shut the door after her. But 
this did not necessarily mean that there would not be a 
storm, and he braced himself to meet it. 

There was no storm, however. Mrs. Smeeth's first fury 
had passed, though she was still very agitated. ‘ If it hadn't 
been for George, I was going to say something to you, 
Herbert, you wouldn't forget for a long, long time. But 
he says you 're very upset about your work.' 

'I am,' said Mr. Smeeth in a very low voice. 

‘ He says you 're going to lose your job. Is that right ? ' 

‘That's right, Edie. It's all up with Twigg and 
Dersingham. In a week or two I '11 be finding myself 
without a job.' 



452 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

'You 're sure this time, dad? I mean — it 's not one of 
your false alarms, is it ? * 

'I wish it was. No, there's no false alarm about it 
this time.' 

'Mind you/ cried Mrs. Smeeth hastily, shakily, 'that 's 
no reason why you should have gone and behaved like this. 
My word, if anybody 'd told me you 'd have gone and done 
a thing like that — you of all men — my word, I ’d have told 
them something! Smashing the place up, too! Look at 
this room! Look at yourself! But I suppose if you were 
upset, you weren't responsible. Here, dad, are you sure, 
really sure, about your job? You're not — you're not 
trying to frighten me again, are you ? ' 

'No, of course I 'm not.' 

' I can't believe it. Here, what happened ? ' 

He tried to tell her what had happened, and at least 
succeeded in convincing her that he was entirely serious. 
'And if you think I 'm going to get another job as good 
as that, or a job worth having at all, in a hurry, you 're 
mistaken, Edie. I know what it is, with office jobs; and 
it '11 have to be an office job because that 's what I 've 
always done. I 'm nearly fifty, and look it. I dare say 
I look older ' 

‘That you don't, dad.' 

‘Well, that 's your opinion, but you won't be employ- 
ing me. I know what it is.' And there came back to him, 
suddenly, poignantly, the memory of that tiny scene out- 
side the office door, several months ago, when he had said 
to that anxious man, the last in the line of applicants, 

‘ Good luck ! ' and had received the ghost of a smile. ' There 
are four of us here. George is out of work, though he might 
get something soon. He 's a good lad, really. There 's 
Edna. She 's earning nothing now.' 

'She will be before this time next week,' said Mrs. Smeeth 
quickly. ' I '11 see to that . ' 

‘She might be, and then again, she might not. And in 
a week or two I '11 be among the unemployed. And we 've 
got about forty odd pounds saved up, that 's what we 've 
got, all told, unless you count this furniture.' 

'I can work,' cried Mrs. Smeeth fiercely. 'You needn't 
think there 'U be me to keep in idleness. I '11 get some- 
thing. I '11 go out charring first/ 



THEY GO HOME 


453 

'But I don't want you to go out charring/ Mr. Smeeth 
told her, almost shouting. ‘I didn’t marry you and I 
haven't worked all this time, never missing a minute if 
I could help it, and we didn’t save and plan to get this 
home together, so you could go out charring. My God, 
it 's not good enough. When I think of the way I 've 
worked and planned and gone without things to get us a 
decent position !* His voice dropped. 

'We’ll manage somehow.' And having said this, Mrs. 
Smeeth, the gay and confident partner, suddenly and 
astonishingly burst into tears. 

'Manage? We’ll have to manage,' Mr. Smeeth had 
begun, grimly. Then he changed his tone. 'Here, Edie. 
That 's all right, that ’s all right. Now then, now then. 
I 'm sorry I lost my temper too ’ 

'It was my fault,' she sobbed. ‘Yes, it is. I deserved 
it. I know I 've spent too much money. Yes, I have.' 

'Oh, never mind. You weren’t to know the firm was 
going broke like that. I didn’t know myself. Never more 
surprised in my life. Here, Edie. Now then, now then/ 
He was standing beside her now. 

'Oh, dear/ she gasped, a few minutes later, trying to 
wipe her eyes. She was both laughing and crying now 
'Oh, dear, dear, dear, dear! ' 

He looked at her solemnly. 

'Oh dear, dear, you do look a sight, dad. I don't know 
who looks the worst, you or this room. I never saw such 
a sketch, though I expect I ’m bad enough, goodness 
knows ! ' 

' I 've dropped my eyeglasses, that 's all that 's wrong 
with me,' Mr. Smeeth announced, not without dignity. 

‘I can see that, dad, I can see that,' she told him, 
dabbing at her face. ‘Here, I’ll look for them. You 
sit down. But, mind you, if they 're broken, don't blame 
me. It wasn't me that started throwing things about 
to-night, was it? Here they are.' 

'Broken?' 

'Yes, somebody made no mistake when they trod on 
them. You '11 have to wear your old ones for a day or 
two, that 's all. I ’ll go and get them for you, and then 
you can help me to clear this mess up.' 

'All right, Edie/ Mr. Smeeth hesitated. 'Is there 



454 ANGEL PAVEMENT 

anything to eat in the house. I ’m getting hungry 
now.’ 

' Didn’t you have anything ? Haven’t you had anything 
at all to-night? You silly man, why didn’t you say so? 
I ’ll go and get you something now. You go and get your 
glasses, you know where they are— in the drawer upstairs. 
If you can’t see them, you can feel for them. Yes, in the 
top drawer. And I ’ll get you something to eat while 
you’re finding them. Oh dear, what a life? Still, it’s 
the only one we 've got, I suppose, so we ’d better make 
what we can out of it.’ 

She bustled out and Mr. Smeeth followed her. He 
was very short-sighted, almost helpless without his glasses; 
and after he had stumbled upstairs to their bedroom, he 
spent some time groping about for the old pair. Annoyed 
by the dim shapelessness of everything, he told himself 
that he ought to have been wearing his glasses before he 
started on such a search. Then he saw the irony of it and 
was quite entertained for a few moments, during which he 
felt for the first time for a long while a curiously reassuring 
detachment from things, and when he found the old glasses 
and put them on, he seemed, for one brief interval, to be 
staring at another and smaller world, and it was a world 
that could play all manner of tricks with Herbert Norman 
Smeeth, but could never capture, swallow, and digest the 
whole of him. The newly-born ironist then returned down- 
stairs, to eat his supper. 



EPILOGUE 


Mr. Golspie, pottering about in his cabin, would not have 
known she was moving off if he had not suddenly seen a 
blue funnel go wandering across the open porthole. He 
could feel no motion, but then she was not moving under 
her own steam, but was being taken out of the docks by 
tugs. Mr. Golspie put his head into the next cabin, where 
his daughter was still fussing about with her things. 
‘We’re off,’ he said, grinning at her. Lena showed no 
sign of excitement. You might have thought she had been 
travelling to the River Plate all her life. 

‘Coming out? ’ said her father. 

‘Not yet. Are we really going? There doesn’t seem to 
be any excitement.’ 

'There isn’t. If that’s what you want, we ought to 
have gone on a liner and then you ’d have had palaver 
enough — kissing and crying and cheering and God knows 
what. These boats do it quietly.’ 

‘Well, I ’m disappointed. But I ’ll come out when 
there ’s something to see and I ’ve put these things away. 
I 'm rather tired of staring at these silly docks, though. 
Tell me when anything happens.’ 

He nodded, grinned again at her, then withdrew, and 
went out on to the main deck, where several of the other 
passengers were standing. There were only a dozen 
passengers all told, for this was primarily a cargo boat. 
One of these fellow travellers caught Mr. Golspie’s eye, 
nodded, and then came nearer. They had exchanged a 
few remarks already, each having recognized in the other 
an old hand and a kindred spirit. They knew even now 
that the moment the steward was at liberty to dispense 
his liquors, they would be having a drink together, the first 
of many, many drinks. This other man, Sugden, was a 
tallish fellow with a long bony face and a vast shaven 
upper lip, a Lancashire man who travelled for some 
chemical firm. He had one of those hard, fiat, Lancashire 

455 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


456 

voices that give every statement they make a lugubrious 
and disillusioned air. 

‘Moving/ that voice announced now, to Mr. Golspie. 

'Moving/ said Mr. Golspie. 

They stood together, two solid middle-aged men, and 
together they watched the long line of masts and funnels 
in the Royal Albert Dock go sliding away. They were 
still in London, and no great distance from the buses and 
trams, the teashops and the pubs, yet all that London 
seemed to have disappeared long ago. Here was another 
city with streets and squares of dark water, a city of wharves 
and sheds, masts and funnels and cranes, barges, tugs, 
and lighters. Wherever you looked there appeared to be 
nothing but these things, though in the far distance a haze 
of smoke, hanging above the multitudinous chimney pots 
of Poplar and Bow, suggested that the other London, the 
brick and paving-stone London, was still there. It was 
not a bad morning for the time of year. Now and then 
the sunlight struggled through and set the water glittering 
or brought out ghostly rainbow hues on the darker oilier 
patches. 

‘This is where they bring all the meat/ said Sugden. 
‘This, and Liverpool. If you blocked this place up for a 
week or two, a lot o’ people would find themselves without 
their Sunday dinners. Not me, though. Give me English 
meat, when I can get it. And when I 'm at home, I insist 
on having it. Get enough o’ the other sort when I ’m away/ 

‘ You ’ve been on these boats before, haven't you? * 

‘ I have. I ’ve been on this very ship twice before. 
They know me here. You ask ’em/ 

‘Food all right?’ 

‘Suits me,’ replied Sugden. ‘Should suit you, too. 
Good quality and plenty of it. Nothing fancy, y’ know— 
not like these liners, with their chefs and what not — but 
plenty o’ good solid stuff. That ’s what I like.' 

Apparently it was what Mr. Golspie liked too. He 
produced a cigar case, and the two men lit up and through 
a fragrant dribble of smoke regarded the moving docks 
with half-closed eyes and a vague air of patronage. 

‘ This port of London 's a bit of an eye-opener to me/ 
Mr. Golspie remarked. 

‘Ever been all round it? Tremendous — oh tremendous! 



EPILOGUE 457 

There 's the West India Docks further up here, and then 
the Surrey Commercial on the other side. You never 
saw such a place. It 's a hard day’s work looking round 
the Surrey Commercial. Chap tried to show me once, but 
I gave it up. And then you Ve got the London Docks 
further up still. And Tilbury, of course. If you go out 
on one of the regular liners and mail boats, you get on down 
at Tilbury. I Ve done that once or twice, but this suits me 
better. When I ’m aboard a ship, I like to travel quietly. 
I don’t like all this floating hotel, song-and-dance, fancy- 
dress ball business. What d’ you say?’ 

'Haven't been on one of those big ships for donkeys' 
years,’ Mr. Golspie confessed. ’I ’ve never been out to 
South America before, as a matter of fact. I Ve been to 
the States, in my time, and I ’ve been to Central America, 
but not to South. But an old pal of mine 's out there — 
Montevideo *s his headquarters — and he 's put up a good 
proposition, so I 'm going to see what it looks like/ 

4 Plenty o’ money there, plenty. Only place where there 
is now, there and the States. I shouldn't like to live there 
though. Wouldn’t suit me.’ 

‘And where do you live when you 're at home? ' 

' St. Helens. That ’s where my firm is, and that ’s where 
I live. Been there all my life. D' you know it ? ' 

‘Saw it once from the train,’ Mr. Golspie replied. ‘Bit 
ugly, isn't it ? ' 

Mr. Sugden was not surprised. Obviously he had heard 
this before. ‘ Yes, it 's a bit ugly, if you 're not used to it. 
But I’ma big ugly myself. And if it comes to that, you ’re 
no beauty.' And he roared with laughter. 

Mr. Golspie laughed too, companionably. They strolled 
round the deck, on which Miss Lena Golspie, in a fur coat 
and with a scarlet scarf about her neck, soon made an 
appearance, to the delight of several of the younger male 
passengers and ship's officers, who had been waiting for 
this moment, after hoping, with the despair bom of many 
previous disappointments, that she was not merely a fleeting 
vision, one of those lovely creatures who come aboard for 
an hour or two and then depart, leaving the whole ship 
under a shadow. She joined her father and was intro- 
duced to Mr. Sugden (not an impressionable man), and 
then wandered away, to stare with disdainful interest at 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


458 

the other ships and to gather out of the comers of her 
brilliant eyes a good deal of exciting preliminary informa- 
tion about her fellow passengers. The scene before her 
— the ship had stopped now in that unaccountable fashion 
that ships have — seemed to her very ugly and dull, and it 
was incredible that this dirty water and drab messiness 
should be the beginning of a voyage to South America, of 
which her fancy entertained the liveliest and most exciting 
pictures, chiefly derived from the films. After that awful 
night with the boy from the office, she had been only too 
glad to leave London, which seemed to her, on the whole, a 
stupid place, but she could hardly believe now that in a 
fortnight or so she would be staring at South American 
young men with black side-whiskers and absurd hats. 
She was annoyed with the ship for stopping like this, as 
if it had nothing better to do than loiter about these dingy 
sheds and flat boats full of barrels, and when one of the 
officers hung about, looking as if he wanted to pour out 
information, she gave him a haughty glance and walked 
away. 

Her father and his new acquaintance, having finished 
their cigars, leaned over the rail, and decided that they 
were ready for lunch. Meanwhile, they talked idly. 

‘ I don't blame you,' said Mr. Sugden. ‘I don't like 
London myself — never did. I had a year there once. 
Didn't like it at all. I couldn't get on with the Londoners 
— too much of this haw-haw-haw stuff and the striped 
trousers and black coat and white spat business. Didn't 
suit me, I can tell you. They thought they were smart, too.' 

'They 're not — most of 'em,' said Mr. Golspie. 'I soon 
found that out.' 

'So did I,' the other continued in his curiously flat 
mournful voice, 1 and when I did find it out and told 'em 
as much, they didn't like it. No, they didn't like it.' 
Mr. Sugden did not go on to explain why they should have 
liked it. He merely repeated several times more that they 
didn't like it. But he was yawning rather than talking. 

‘Well, I 've just had about four or five months of it,' 
said Mr. Golspie, indifferently, ‘and that was quite enough 
for me. They 're half dead, most of 'em — half dead. No 
dash. No guts. I want a place where everybody 's alive, 
where there 's something doing.' 



459 


EPILOGUE 

'Where were you in London ?* 

'What — working?* Well, my headquarters were in a 
funny little street — I don*t suppose you *ve heard of it — 
down in the City it is.* 

'I know the City fairly well.* 

' I wonder if you know this place. I *d never heard of it 
before. Angel Pavement.* 

'Angel Pavement? No, I never heard of that. You 
win. Well, I must say I *m ready for my lunch. I think 
I 'll slip down and wash my hands. Well, well , well, 
we-ell.’ He sang these, at the same time stifling a yawn. 
‘ Meet any angels there ? ' 

'What, in Angel Pavement? I can’t say I did.* 

'Not on view, eh?* 

'Not while I was there. I met somebody who nearly 
turned into one, but not quite. No, they were all just 
human, and they hadn’t got too dam* much of that. I was 
sorry for the poor devils — some of ’em.* 

'All I’m sorry for just now is my inside,* said Mr. 
Sugden, with great deliberation. 'It ’s dying out for a 
piece of steak nicely done and a few chips. Hello, there 
go the Customs chaps. We ought to be moving again 
soon. And — my word! — it ’s time they thought about a 
bit o* lunch. Look at the time. Let ’s go down.' 

'Listen. That’s it,* said Mr. Golspie. 'Come on. 
Oh, I *11 get hold of that daughter of mine.' 

When they returned after lunch, they found that they 
had left the docks behind and were now in the river. There 
was a new chill freshness in the air and a vague hint of the 
sea. On one side, the last of Woolwich was straggling 
past, with a misty Shooters Hill behind ; and on the other 
side there were some old piers and a gas works. 

‘Better take a last look at London,* said Mr. Golspie to 
his daughter, as they walked round the deck. 'There it 
is, see?' 

'There 's nothing to see,’ said Lena, looking back at the 
glistening streaky water and the haze and shadows beyond. 
‘Not worth looking at.' 

‘All gone in smoke, eh? I mean the proper London. 
As a matter of fact, we 're not out of London yet. That 's 
right, isn’t it ? ' 

' Not quite out of it yet,' replied Mr. Sugden, ' but you 've 



ANGEL PAVEMENT 


460 

seen all there is to see. I think I *11 go down and have my 
little afternoon snooze.* 

A string of barges passed them, moving slowly on to the 
very heart of the city. A gull dropped, wheeled, flashed, 
was gone, and with it went what little sun there was. The 
gleam faded from the face of the river; a chill wind stirred; 
the distant banks, a higgledy-piggledy of little buildings 
and green patches, retreated; and even the smoky haze of 
London city slipped away from them, thinning out into 
grey sky. 'Well, the sun's gone in,' said Mr. Golspie, 
'so I *11 go in, too.' Somewhere a steamer hooted twice 
out of the ghostliness. He gave a last look, then turned 
away. 'And that 's that/ 




